<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>
      Ideas
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src=
            "mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default"
            type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="ai" class="section level2 contentCol">
        <h1>Ideas</h1>
        <p>
          Animals shaking to remove water. Centrifugal forces 10 to 70
          times $g$. See <a
          href="http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/80beats/2012/08/16/how-the-wet-dog-shake-gets-mammals-dry-in-no-time-flat/">Discover
          blog</a> and <a
          href="http://www.nature.com/news/scientists-do-the-wet-dog-shake-1.11177">Nature
          News &amp; Comment</a>, as well as the <a
          href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2012.0429">original
          paper</a> and the <a
          href="http://dickerson.gatech.edu/file/Wet-Dog_Shake.html">researcher's
          website</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          Running versus walking. Can we compute the energy efficiency
          based on the work done given a trajectory for the center of
          mass or something like that? Could introduce the idea of
          inverse kinematics. See <a
          href="http://vimeo.com/53914149">Cheetahs on the
          Edge--Director's Cut</a> for cheetah running
          footage. Explain "biomechanics", tendons, muscles,
          etc. Energy efficiency comes from not moving the body up and
          down. Note how stable the cheetah's body and head are. See
          also <a
          href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_dPlkFPowCc">Chicken
          Head Tracking - Smarter Every Day</a> for chicken's ability
          to keep their heads stable. This is very challenging for
          current robots. Show <a
          href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=chPanW0QWhA">Cheetah
          Robot from Boston Dynamics</a> (28 mph for the robot, about
          the same as Usain Bolt - real cheetahs can do 75 mph over
          short distances). Fastest road car ever is Bugatti Veyron,
          can reach 60 mph in <a
          href="http://www.gizmag.com/go/5805/">2.8 seconds</a>, about
          the same as a cheetah which can do it in <a
          href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheetah">3
          seconds</a>. Also note how little the cheetah is in contact
          with the ground. According to some guy on Reddit, in the
          9.58 seconds it took Usain Bolt to finish the 100, he spent
          5.29 seconds not touching the ground at all.
        </p>
        <p>
          Spear throwers.
        </p>
        <p>
          <a
          href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chebychev%E2%80%93Gr%C3%BCbler%E2%80%93Kutzbach_criterion">Chebychev–Grübler–Kutzbach
          criterion</a> for determining the degrees of freedom of a
          kinematic chain
        </p>
        <p>
          Photo taken half-in/half-out of a streetcar. Don
          Chamblee. <a
          href="http://www.don-chamblee-photography.com/-/don-chamblee-photography/gallery.asp?LID=&amp;photoID=11557877">link</a>. Also
          <a href="http://imgur.com/moVdo">imgur link</a>. <a
          href="ai_moVdo.jpg">local link</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          Animation of the graphical proof of Pythagorus'
          equation. Proof of #rvv-ey. See <a
          href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pythagorean_theorem">wikipedia
          page</a>, the animation on the left, showing 4 triangles of
          sides $a,b,c$ arranged inside a square of side length $a +
          b$ so that there is an interior square of side length $c$,
          with area $c^2$. Then rotate two of the triangles around to
          form two rectangles of size $a \times b$, and the remaining
          area is composed of two squares of side lengths $a$ and $b$,
          respectively. From the original image we can also
          immediately write that $(a + b)^2 = c^2 + 4(ab/2) = c^2 +
          2ab$.
        </p>
        <p>
          Proof of integration by parts with a <a
          href="ai_int_by_parts.pdf">diagram</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          Proof that the derivative of $\sin$ is $\cos$ from a <a
          href="ai_ma006.pdf">diagram</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          <a
          href="http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/04/04/take-it-to-the-limit/">Graphical
          proof</a> that the volume of a circle is $\pi r^2$ by Steven
          Strogatz.
        </p>
        <p>
          Pull-rod suspension in the <a
          href="http://scarbsf1.com/blog1/2012/02/23/launch-analysis-ferrari-f2012/">Ferrari
          F2012</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          <a href="http://www.haynes.co.uk/redbull/index.htm">Red Bull
          Racing F1 Car — Owners' Workshop Manual</a>, also from <a
          href="http://www.haynes.co.uk/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/ProductDisplay?catalogId=10001&amp;storeId=10001&amp;productId=52821&amp;langId=-1&amp;parent_category_rn=34566">Haynes
          online</a>, review at <a
          href="http://scarbsf1.com/blog1/2011/07/19/book-review-haynes-red-bull-racing-f1-car/">ScarbsF1</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          See <a href="ai_RuinaPratapNoProblems.pdf">Ruina and Pratap</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          Helicopters, rotors, swash plate for producing
          oscillation. Why have a tail rotor?
        </p>
        <p>
          Invention of various mathematical systems. <a
          href="http://jeff560.tripod.com/mathsym.html">Full
          list</a>. The <a
          href="http://jeff560.tripod.com/relation.html">equal
          sign</a> was first used in <a
          href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Whetstone_of_Witte">The
          Whetstone of Witte</a>. The <a
          href="http://archive.org/details/TheWhetstoneOfWitte">full
          copy</a> of this text is also available.
        </p>
        <p>
          Vector notation: bold was first used by <a
          href="http://jeff560.tripod.com/matrices.html">the book</a>
          by E. B. Wilson entitled <i>Vector Analysis: A Text Book for
          the Use of Students of Mathematics and Physics Founded upon
          the Lectures of J. Willard Gibbs</i> (1901). This book
          followed Hamilton in using i,j,k for the basis vectors,
          thinking of this as an extension of complex numbers.
        </p>
        <p>
          Exploded view diagrams drawing of engineering systems <a
          href="http://www.stephenbiesty.co.uk/">here</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          Why do wind turbines always have three blades? Why not two?
          See <a href="ai_MIT16_07F09_Lec27.pdf">notes</a>.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
