<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head profile="http://www.w3.org/2005/10/profile">
    <link rel="icon" type="image/png" href="favicon.png" /><meta charset="UTF-8"><link href="../style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"><script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script><title>AOG: How does GPS work?</title></head><body><div class="container"><div class="header"><div class="login"><p>Log in</p></div><h1>TAM 212: Dynamics</h1></div><div class="navbar"><ul><li><a href="index.html" id="navHome">Home</a></li><li><a href="sched.html" id="navSched">Schedule</a></li><li><a href="ref.html" id="navRef">Reference</a></li><li class="activeNav"><a href="app.html" id="navApp">Applications</a></li></ul></div><div class="mainblock"><div class="contentBlock"><div id="AOG" class="section level2 contentCol"><h2>AOG: How does GPS work?</h2>
<p>Consider the 2D version of it. We have several satellites and one receiver. We know the satellite positions very accurately and they can transmit radio pulses to the receiver. To measure the receiver-satellite distances we need to know the signal travel time between them. We could send a pulse receiver-satellite-receiver, measure the time, and divide by two (like laser ranging), but this would require high-powered receivers, which we don’t want. Alternatively, the satellites could send the time encoded in the pulse, and then the receiver could measure the time of arrival of the signal and thus work out the travel time. However, this would require a very accurate clock in the receiver. Thermally compensated quartz chronometers drift by around \(1\rm\ \mu s\) per day, which would introduce about \(300\rm\ m\) error per day. Typical wristwatches are only accurate to about \(0.5\rm\ s\) per day. See <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quartz_clock"><code class="url">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quartz_clock</code></a>. We do not want to have to put atomic clocks in receivers.</p>
<p>To overcome these problems, the satellites transmit the time in the pulse, but then the receiver solves for the time as well as position. For example, at a certain time the receiver gets signals \((t_i, x_i, y_i)\) from \(i = 1,\ldots,n\) satellites. It needs to know \((t, x, y)\) for itself. Using the speed of light \(c\), we have</p>
<p>\[\begin{aligned}
  c(t - t_i) = \sqrt{(x - x_i)^2 + (y - y_i)^2}\end{aligned}\]</p>
<p>for each satellite \(i\). To solve for the three unknowns \((t, x, y)\) we need three satellites in 2D. In 3D we need four satellites. Thinking about the geometry we can see that this will in general give two solutions. We can differentiate these based on either a fifth satellite, knowledge that we are near the surface of the Earth, or that we are near a recent position fix.</p>
<p>Other notes:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>GPS satellites need to have very well synchronized clocks. They typically carry four atomic clocks per satellite.</p></li>
<li><p>Rather than the satellites transmitting their \(x,y,z\) positions, they actually transmit their orbital parameters and the receiver computes the positions from the satellite time.</p></li>
<li><p>The speed of transmission is not exactly \(c\) (speed of light in a vacuum), due to atmosphere and ionosphere delays.</p></li>
</ol>
</div><div class="infoCol"></div></div></div><div class="footer"><p class="version">Version: 2012-06-25T17:30:52.094481</p><p class="copyright">Copyright (C) 2012 Matthew West</p></div></div></body></html>
