<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head profile="http://www.w3.org/2005/10/profile">
    <link rel="icon" type="image/png" href="favicon.png" /><meta charset="UTF-8"><link href="../style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"><script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script><title>AOR: Sunrise and sunset</title></head><body><div class="container"><div class="header"><div class="login"><p>Log in</p></div><h1>TAM 212: Dynamics</h1></div><div class="navbar"><ul><li><a href="index.html" id="navHome">Home</a></li><li><a href="sched.html" id="navSched">Schedule</a></li><li><a href="ref.html" id="navRef">Reference</a></li><li class="activeNav"><a href="app.html" id="navApp">Applications</a></li></ul></div><div class="mainblock"><div class="contentBlock"><div id="AOR" class="section level2 contentCol"><h2>AOR: Sunrise and sunset</h2>
<p>Questions:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>Where on the horizon will the sun rise on September 1st in Urbana?</p></li>
<li><p>How many hours of sunlight will Urbana receive on September 1st?</p></li>
<li><p>What is the maximum angle above the horizon that the sun will attain on September 1st in Urbana?</p></li>
</ol>
<p>Use several coordinate systems. First, ecliptic coordinates, centered at the Sun with the \(x\)-\(y\) plane containing the Earth’s orbit, and the \(x\) axis pointing from the Sun through the Earth on the vernal (autumnal) equinox. In this coordinate system we can compute the sun-earth vector and the Earth-north-pole vector.</p>
<p>Second, equatorial coordinates, centered at the Earth, \(z\) axis to the North pole, \(x\) axis the same as the ecliptic \(x\) axis, and appropriate \(y\) axis. Convert the Earth-Sun vector into these coordinates.</p>
<p>Alternatively, the second coordinate system could use equatorial \(x\)-\(y\) coordinates so that the Earth-Sun vector is in the \(x\)-\(z\) plane. Call this the equatorial/midday system. Produce this coordinate system with cross products. This is probably a better choice that using the vernal \(x\) direction.</p>
<p>In equatorial coordinates, Urbana traces out a circle of constant latitude over the course of a day, which we can write easily in spherical coordinates and convert to equatorial Cartesian as a function of rotation \(\theta\).</p>
<p>The third useful coordinate system is horizontal coordinates (SEZ) at Urbana, consisting of South, East, and vertical (Z) directions. We can write these three vectors in terms of the equatorial basis as functions of rotation angle \(\theta\).</p>
<p>Sunrise/sunset occur when the Sun is on the horizon. That is, when the Earth-Sun vector is orthogonal to the local vertical (neglecting parallax).</p>
<p>Take \(\boldsymbol{s}\) to be the Earth-Sun vector and \(\boldsymbol{u}\) to be the Earth-Urbana vector at midday, in the equatorial/midday coordinate system. Thus \(\boldsymbol{s} = (s_x, 0, s_z)\) and \(\boldsymbol{u} = (u_x, 0,
u_z)\). Rotating \(\boldsymbol{u}\) through angle \(\theta\) gives \((u_x
\cos\theta, u_x \sin\theta, u_z)\) and we want this to be orthogonal to \(\boldsymbol{s}\), so the dot product gives \(s_x u_x \cos\theta + s_z u_z =
0\), which tells us the Earth rotation angle from midday to sunrise/sunset, so we know the location of Urbana at sunrise/sunset.</p>
<p>This immediately tells us the hours of daylight, and we can convert the Earth-Sun vector into the SEZ basis at sunrise to work out the azimuth of the sun at sunrise.</p>
<p>The maximum angle of the sun at midday can be directly determined from \(\boldsymbol{s}\) and \(\boldsymbol{u}\).</p>
</div><div class="infoCol"></div></div></div><div class="footer"><p class="version">Version: 2012-06-25T17:30:52.093086</p><p class="copyright">Copyright (C) 2012 Matthew West</p></div></div></body></html>
