<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta charset="UTF-8"><link href="../style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"><script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script><script src="../PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script><title>AOS: What is the shortest-path distances between Urbana and Shanghai?</title></head><body><div class="container"><div class="header"><div class="login"><p>Log in</p></div><h1>TAM 212: Dynamics</h1></div><div class="navbar"><ul><li><a href="index.html" id="navHome">Home</a></li><li><a href="sched.html" id="navSched">Schedule</a></li><li><a href="ref.html" id="navRef">Reference</a></li><li class="activeNav"><a href="app.html" id="navApp">Applications</a></li></ul></div><div class="mainblock"><div class="contentBlock"><div id="AOS" class="section level2 contentCol"><h2>AOS: What is the shortest-path distances between Urbana and Shanghai?</h2>
<p>Take lat/long for Urbana and Shanghai:</p>
<p>\[\begin{aligned}
  \text{Urbana: } &amp;40.109665^\circ\text{N}, 88.204247^\circ\text{W} \\
  \text{Shanghai: } &amp;31.2^\circ\text{N}, 121.5^\circ\text{E}\end{aligned}\]</p>
<p>Write as coordinates:</p>
<p>\[\begin{aligned}
  \lambda_{\rm U} &amp;= \ldots \\
  \phi_{\rm U} &amp;= \ldots \\
  \lambda_{\rm S} &amp;= \ldots \\
  \phi_{\rm S} &amp;= \ldots\end{aligned}\]</p>
<p>Convert to Cartesian:</p>
<p>\[\begin{aligned}
  x_{\rm U} &amp;= \ldots \\
  y_{\rm U} &amp;= \ldots \\
  z_{\rm U} &amp;= \ldots\end{aligned}\]</p>
<p>The position vectors from the center of the Earth are:</p>
<p>\[\begin{aligned}
  \overrightarrow{OU} &amp;= \ldots \,\hat{\imath} + \ldots \,\hat{j} + \ldots \,\hat{k} \\
  \overrightarrow{OS} &amp;= \ldots \,\hat{\imath} + \ldots \,\hat{j} + \ldots \,\hat{k}\end{aligned}\]</p>
<p>These two points define a great circle on the sphere. The shortest path is along this great circle. The angle \(\theta\) within the great circle can be found with the dot product formula VT.DP. Then the arc length is \(R_{\rm E} \theta\).</p>
<p>Further questions:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>What is the maximum latitude reached if we fly along a great circle from Chicago to Shanghai? Find latitude as a function of longitude along this path and plot it on a 2D map of the earth.</p></li>
<li><p>A better model of the Earth is an ellipsoid, satisfying \((x/6378)^2 + (y/6378)^2 + (z/6357)^2 = 1\) (in km). How could we compute distances on an ellipsoid? This is hard. See <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vincenty%27s_formulae"><code class="url">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vincenty%27s_formulae</code></a> for one answer.</p></li>
</ol>
</div><div class="infoCol"></div></div></div><div class="footer"><p class="version">Version: 2012-06-25T17:30:52.091717</p><p class="copyright">Copyright (C) 2012 Matthew West</p></div></div></body></html>
