<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>
      TAM 212
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src=
            "mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default"
            type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="mainPage">
      <div class="mainContent">
        <ul>
          <li>Units and dimensions.</li>
          <li>Vector derivatives, velocity and acceleration.</li>
          <li>Forces, F = ma, point masses.</li>
          <li>Free body diagrams.</li>
          <li>Method of assumed forces, method of assumed motion.</li>
          <li>Constrained motion, degrees of freedom.</li>
          <li>Rigid bodies, angular velocity, v = vc + omega cross r.</li>
          <li>Euler's laws of motion in 2D: F = m aCM, I alpha = M.</li>
          <li>Coordinate systems, basis vectors: polar, spherical.</li>
          <li>Differentiating unit vectors, velocity and acceleration in coordinate systems.</li>
          <li>Tangential/normal coordinates.</li>
          <li>Relative motion. Change of frame.</li>
          <li>Energy, work, conservative forces.</li>
          <li>Momentum, impulse.</li>
          <li>Contact: collisions and friction (viscous/wet and Coulomb/dry).</li>
          <li>Angular momentum.</li>
          <li>Euler's laws in 2D with variable geometry, changing I.</li>
          <li>Euler's laws in 3D, gyroscopes.</li>
          <li>
            From Ruina and Pratap:
            <ul>
              <li>
                Two key toolbox skills (written HW checking):
                <ol>
                  <li>Do clear, correct vector algebra, keeping vectors and scalars distinct.</li>
                  <li>Draw clear and reliable free-body diagrams.</li>
                </ol>
              </li>
              <li>
                Three key computational skills:
                <ol>
                  <li>Solution of simultaneous algebraic equations (linear and nonlinear).</li>
                  <li>Plotting.</li>
                  <li>Numerical solution of ODEs.</li>
                </ol>
              </li>
            </ul>
          </li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
