<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>
      Information
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="info.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">

  var _gaq = _gaq || [];
  _gaq.push(['_setAccount', 'UA-37625161-1']);
  _gaq.push(['_trackPageview']);

  (function() {
    var ga = document.createElement('script'); ga.type = 'text/javascript'; ga.async = true;
    ga.src = ('https:' == document.location.protocol ? 'https://ssl' : 'http://www') + '.google-analytics.com/ga.js';
    var s = document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(ga, s);
  })();

</script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="container">
      <div class="header"><h1>TAM 212: Introductory Dynamics</h1></div>
      <div class="navbar">
        <ul><li><a href="index.xhtml" id="navHome">Home</a></li><li><a href="info.xhtml" id="navInfo">Info</a></li><li><a href="people.xhtml" id="navPeople">People</a></li><li><a href="sched.xhtml" id="navSched">Schedule</a></li><li><a href="ref.xhtml" id="navRef">Reference</a></li><li><a href="apps.xhtml" id="navApps">Applications</a></li></ul>
      </div>
      <div class="browserWarning">
        <strong>Warning:</strong>
        This website has only been tested on Chrome version 24 and higher. Your browser may not be fully supported.
      </div>
      <div class="mainBlock">
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div class="contentCol">
        <p>
          <strong>Website:</strong> The official class website is <a
          href="http://courses.engr.illinois.edu/tam212/">http://courses.engr.illinois.edu/tam212/</a>
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Description:</strong> Kinematics and dynamics of the
          three-dimensional motion of particles; kinematics and
          dynamics of the plane motion of rigid bodies; methods of
          work/energy and impulse/momentum; moving reference frames.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Prerequisites:</strong> TAM 210 or TAM 211.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Text:</strong> D. J. McGill and W. W. King,
          <em>Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics</em>, 4th edition,
          Tichenor Publishing, 2003, ISBN 0742134938.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Alternative texts:</strong>
        </p>
        <ul>
          <li>R. C. Hibbeler, <em>Engineering Mechanics:
          Dynamics</em>, 13th edition, Prentice Hall, 2012, ISBN
          0132911272, (<a
          href="http://www.amazon.com/Engineering-Mechanics-Dynamics-Russell-Hibbeler/dp/0132911272">Amazon</a>).</li>
          <li>G. Gray, F. Costanzo, and M. Plesha, <em>Engineering
          Mechanics: Dynamics</em>, 1st edition, McGraw-Hill, 2009,
          ISBN 0077275543 (<a
          href="http://www.amazon.com/Engineering-Mechanics-Dynamics-Gary-Gray/dp/0077275543">Amazon</a>).</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          <strong>Special accommodations:</strong> To obtain
          disability-related academic adjustments or accommodations,
          students with disabilities must contact their professor and
          <a href="http://disability.illinois.edu/">Disability
          Resources and Educational Services (DRES)</a> as soon as
          possible.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>iClickers:</strong> Short quizzes are conducted
          during lectures using iClickers (50% participation, 50%
          correctness). An iClicker can be purchased from the
          bookstore must be activated at the <a
          href="https://my.physics.illinois.edu/iclicker/">registration
          site</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Grading:</strong> The total score for the course is
          computed with the following weights:
        </p>
        <table>
          <tr><td>Midterm 1 Exam</td><td>20%</td><td class="leftSpace">Written reports</td><td>5%</td></tr>
          <tr><td>Midterm 2 Exam</td><td>20%</td><td class="leftSpace">Online homework</td><td>15%</td></tr>
          <tr><td>Final Exam</td><td>30%</td><td class="leftSpace">Discussion worksheets</td><td>8%</td></tr>
          <tr><td>In-lecture iClickers</td><td>2%</td><td class="leftSpace"></td></tr>
        </table>
        <p>
          For written reports, online homework, and discussion
          worksheets, the lowest two scores from each assessment type
          will be dropped before the average score is computed. These
          dropped assessments are intended to cover illness and other
          unavoidable absences. See the Absences policy below.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Final grades:</strong> The total score <i>s</i>
          corresponds to final grades as follows.
        </p>
        <table>
          <tr><td>97% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 100%</td><td>A+</td><td class="leftSpace">93% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 97% </td><td>A</td><td class="leftSpace">90% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 93% </td><td>A-</td></tr>
          <tr><td>87% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt;  90%</td><td>B+</td><td class="leftSpace">83% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 87% </td><td>B</td><td class="leftSpace">80% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 83% </td><td>B-</td></tr>
          <tr><td>77% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt;  80%</td><td>C+</td><td class="leftSpace">73% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 77% </td><td>C</td><td class="leftSpace">70% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 73% </td><td>C-</td></tr>
          <tr><td>67% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt;  70%</td><td>D+</td><td class="leftSpace">63% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 67% </td><td>D</td><td class="leftSpace">60% ≤ <i>s</i> &lt; 63% </td><td>D-</td></tr>
          <tr><td>      <i>s</i> &lt;  60%</td><td>F </td><td class="leftSpace">                 </td><td> </td><td class="leftSpace">                 </td><td>  </td></tr>
        </table>
        <p>
          <strong>Lectures:</strong> Prompt and regular attendance at
          lectures is required. You must attend the lecture section
          that you are officially enrolled in to obtain iClicker
          credit.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Discussion sections:</strong> Prompt and regular
          attendance at your discussion section is required. You must
          attend only the discussion section in which you are
          enrolled. Most discussion sessions will consist of a group
          worksheet exercise, which is a high-energy and efficient 50
          minute learning experience. Students are randomly assigned
          each session to a group of three to five people. Each
          student must submit a completed worksheet, but only one
          randomly chosen worksheet will be scored from each group,
          and every student in that group will be given that score. If
          you are more than 5 minutes late to a discussion session
          then you will not be permitted to complete the
          worksheet. Discussion sections start in Week 1 of semester
          (some of them before the first lecture).
        </p>
        <table class="basic sched" id="info-td">
          <tr><th></th><th>Monday</th><th>Tuesday</th><th>Wednesday</th><th>Thursday</th></tr>
          <tr><th> 8–9 </th><td></td><td>ADI (260) Karthik</td><td></td><td></td></tr>
          <tr><th> 9–10</th><td></td><td>ADC (260) Venanzio</td><td></td><td>ADK (260) Aaron</td></tr>
          <tr><th>10–11</th><td></td><td>ADD (256) Aaron<br />ADQ (344) Jan</td><td>ADS (252) Ray</td><td>ADT (243) Aaron<br />ADU (344) Jan</td></tr>
          <tr><th>11–12</th><td></td><td>ADE (252) Jan</td><td></td><td>ADL (256) Kumar</td></tr>
          <tr><th>12–1 </th><td>ADA (243) Ray<br />ADP (135) Seung</td><td>ADF (335) Seung<br />ADG (336) Kumar</td><td>ADJ (256) Ray<br />ADR (252) Lin</td><td>ADN (260) Kumar</td></tr>
          <tr><th> 1–2 </th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr>
          <tr><th> 2–3 </th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr>
          <tr><th> 3–4 </th><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr>
          <tr><th> 4–5 </th><td>ADV (252) Karthik</td><td></td><td>ADO (218) Mazhar<br />ADW (252) Lin</td><td></td></tr>
          <tr><th> 5–6 </th><td>ADB (218) Mazhar</td><td>ADH (218) Karthik</td><td>ADM (243) Mazhar</td><td></td></tr>
        </table>
        <p>
          All discussion sections are in MEB (Mech. Eng. Bldg.) in the
          room numbers in parentheses above.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Office hours:</strong> Daily office hours are held
          in Grainger 429 from 4–8pm on Sunday through Friday each
          week, staffed by TAs and professors. You can come to the
          office hours at any time for help about anything related to
          the course. Office hours will start in Week 2 of the
          semester (on Sunday, January 20).
        </p>
        <table class="basic sched" id="info-to">
          <tr><th></th><th>Sunday</th><th>Monday</th><th>Tuesday</th><th>Wednesday</th><th>Thursday</th><th>Friday</th></tr>
          <tr><th>4–5</th><td>Ray<br />Venanzio</td><td>Ray<br />Venanzio</td><td>Kumar<br />Venanzio</td><td>Aaron<br />Ray</td><td>Seungho<br />Kumar</td><td>Jan<br />Mazhar</td></tr>
          <tr><th>5–6</th><td>Ray<br />Jan</td><td>Kumar<br />Venanzio</td><td>Mazhar<br />Aaron</td><td>Aaron<br />Kumar</td><td>Seungho<br />Kumar</td><td>Jan<br />Mazhar</td></tr>
          <tr><th>6–7</th><td>Ray<br />Jan</td><td>Karthik<br />Lin</td><td>Karthik<br />Aaron</td><td>Aaron<br />Karthik</td><td>Mazhar<br />Kumar</td><td>Jan<br />Mazhar</td></tr>
          <tr><th>7–8</th><td>Ray<br />Jan</td><td>Karthik<br />Lin</td><td>Karthik<br />Aaron</td><td>Aaron<br />Karthik</td><td>Mazhar<br />Kumar</td><td>Jan<br />Mazhar</td></tr>
        </table>
        <p>
          <strong>Online homeworks:</strong> Weekly online homeworks
          are due Friday midnight, using the smartPhysics
          system. There will be 6 questions per week. Two of the
          questions will have a bonus 10% score if they are submitted
          by Monday. Another two questions will have a similar bonus
          if submitted by Wednesday. Late online homework will be
          accepted with a 50% penalty. The first homework will be due
          in Week 2 of semester.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Written reports:</strong> Each week a written report
          must be submitted, consisting of a full write-up of one
          online homework problem (specified on the <a
          href="sched.xhtml">schedule</a>). This is submitted at the
          start of the weekly discussion session and will be graded by
          the TA and returned in the following week's discussion
          session. Written reports are designed to practice the
          communication of engineering concepts in writing. They will
          be graded based on presentation, neatness, correct use of
          symbols, quality of drawings and diagrams, and clarity of
          explanation. Correctness of the answer will not be
          graded. Late written reports will not be accepted. The first
          reports will be due in Week 2 of semester.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Exams:</strong> Exams are held as shown on the <a
          href="sched.xhtml">class schedule</a>. If you are unable to
          attend an exam then you must inform your professor by email
          at the earliest possible opportunity. For non-emergency
          absences this notification must be at least one week in
          advance. Conflict-exam arrangements will be announced in
          the week before each exam.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Online forum:</strong> This class uses Piazza for
          all online questions and feedback. Please visit the <a
          href="https://piazza.com/illinois/spring2013/tam212">sign-up
          link</a> for this course to register. The <a
          href="https://piazza.com/illinois/spring2013/tam212/home">class
          link</a> will take you to the current class page at any
          time. Official class announcements will be sent via Piazza,
          so you must register with an email address that you
          regularly check. You can also use the “Search for Teammates”
          feature on Piazza to help find a study group. TAs are
          scheduled to be checking Piazza on the following days.
        </p>
        <table class="basic" id="info-tp">
          <tr><th>Sunday</th><th>Monday</th><th>Tuesday</th>
          <th>Wednesday</th><th>Thursday</th><th>Friday</th><th>Saturday</th></tr>
          <tr><td>Aaron</td><td>Ray</td><td>Lin<br />Venanzio<br />Seungho</td>
          <td>Mazhar</td><td>Kumar</td><td>Karthik</td><td>Jan</td></tr>
        </table>
        <p>
          <strong>Participation Star Points:</strong> This course is
          under active development and mistakes will occur in online
          material and on assessments. For each error, the first
          student who posts a correct notification to Piazza will
          receive one Participation Star Point. At the end of semester
          each Star Point will give a bonus score equivalent to 10% of
          one homework question (up to a maximum of 5% extra total
          score). Star Points will also be awarded to students who
          provide good answers to questions on Piazza and for other
          meritorious service throughout the semester.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Gradebook:</strong> All assessment scores are stored
          in the <a
          href="https://my.mechse.illinois.edu/gradebook/">My.MechSE
          gradebook</a>. To have credit awarded, any errors or missing
          scores must be reported to your professor within 2 weeks of
          the due date of the assessment item or by the last day of
          class, whichever is earlier.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Contact and obtaining help:</strong> The two main
          ways to obtain help are online at Piazza, or in person at
          the Grainger office hours. You can also speak with your
          professor briefly after lecture. Please do not send email
          directly to TAs or professors for routine help or
          absences. In case of emergencies related to exams (e.g.,
          illness) then you should email your professor at the
          earliest possibly opportunity.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>CARE:</strong> The Center for Academic Resources in
          Engineering (CARE) provides extra help and tutoring for
          TAM 212. Information is available at the <a
          href="https://wiki.engr.illinois.edu/display/care/Center+for+Academic+Resources+in+Engineering+%28CARE%29">CARE
          website</a> and in person at the CARE offices in Grainger
          library.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>James Scholar honors:</strong> Honors credit is
          available for this course. Please contact your professor for
          more information.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Absences:</strong>
        </p>
        <ol>
          <li>
            Excuses from assessments will only be given in the following circumstances:
            <ol type="a">
              <li>Illness.</li>
              <li>Personal crisis (e.g., car accident, required court
              appearance, death of a close relative).</li>
              <li>Required attendance at an official UIUC activity
              (e.g., varsity athletics, band concert).</li>
            </ol>
          </li>
          <li>
            In all cases you must complete the <a
            href="https://illinois.edu/fb/sec/411728">TAM Excused
            Absence Request Form</a> and upload a scan of the official
            written documentation explaining your absence.
          </li>
          <li>
            In cases (a) or (b) an official excuse letter from the <a
            href="http://www.odos.uiuc.edu/deanonduty/">Dean on
            Duty</a> must be submitted via the online form within
            2 weeks of the due date of the missed assessment, but no
            later than reading day. In cases of extended or unusual
            illness, late submission of excuse documentation will be
            considered.
          </li>
          <li>
            In case (c) an official letter from the designated
            university official must be submitted via the online form
            at least one week prior to the due date of the missed
            assessment.
          </li>
          <li>
            The dropped assessments (see Grading above) are intended
            for excused absences. If there are more excused absences
            for a given assessment type than the standard number of
            dropped assessments for that type, then the number of
            dropped assessments of that type will be increased to be
            equal to the number of excused absences for that type. For
            example, if the two lowest homework scores are normally
            dropped, but you have four excused absences for homeworks,
            then the four lowest homework scores will be dropped.
          </li>
          <li>
            If you will not be able to sit an exam due to illness or
            any other reason, you must send email to your professor at
            the earliest possible opportunity. Excused exams will be
            replaced by a weighted average of the other exam scores at
            the end of semester.
          </li>
          <li>
            Notwithstanding the above, at your professor's discretion
            you may be required to make up any excused work or attend
            substitute instruction or assessment.
          </li>
        </ol>
        <p>
          <strong>Academic integrity, harassment, and
          discrimination:</strong> Academic integrity infractions,
          harassment, and discrimination of any kind will not be
          tolerated. See <a
          href="http://www.admin.illinois.edu/policy/code/article1_part4_1-401.html">Article
          1, Part 4</a> of the <a
          href="http://www.admin.illinois.edu/policy/code/">Student
          Code</a> and the <a
          href="http://oeoa.illinois.edu/campusconduct.html">Campus
          Conduct Policy</a>. Please report any concerns immediately
          to your professor.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
    </div>
      <div class="footer">
        <p class="copyright">Copyright (C) 2012-2013 Matthew West</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
