<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head profile="http://www.w3.org/2005/10/profile">
    <link rel="icon" type="image/png" href="favicon.png" />
    <title>
      Moments of inertia
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="rem.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="rem.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">

  var _gaq = _gaq || [];
  _gaq.push(['_setAccount', 'UA-37625161-1']);
  _gaq.push(['_trackPageview']);

  (function() {
    var ga = document.createElement('script'); ga.type = 'text/javascript'; ga.async = true;
    ga.src = ('https:' == document.location.protocol ? 'https://ssl' : 'http://www') + '.google-analytics.com/ga.js';
    var s = document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(ga, s);
  })();

</script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="container">
      <div class="header"><h1>Dynamics</h1></div>
      <div class="navbar">
        <ul><li><a href="index.xhtml" id="navHome">Home</a></li><li><a href="ref.xhtml" id="navRef">Reference</a></li><li><a href="apps.xhtml" id="navApps">Applications</a></li></ul>
      </div>
      <div class="browserWarning">
        <strong>Warning:</strong>
        This website has only been tested on Chrome version 24 and higher. Your browser may not be fully supported.
      </div>
      <div class="mainBlock">
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rem" class="contentCol">
        <h1>
          Moments of inertia
        </h1>
        <p>
          The moment of inertia of a body, written $I_{P,\hat{a}}$, is
          measured about a rotation axis through point $P$ in
          direction $\hat{a}$. The moment of inertia expresses how
          hard it is to produce an angular acceleration of the body
          about this axis. That is, a body with high moment of inertia
          resists angular acceleration, so if it is not rotating then
          it is hard to start a rotation, while if it is already
          rotating then it is hard to stop.
        </p>
        <p>
          The moment of inertia plays the same role for rotational
          motion as the mass does for translational motion (a high
          mass body is hard to start moving and hard to stop again).
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-ei">
          <p class="envHeader">Moment of inertia about axis $\hat{a}$ through point $P$.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{gathered}
                    I_{P,\hat{a}} = \int_\mathcal{B} \rho r^2 \,dV \\
                    \text{(units: $\rm kg\ m^2$)}
                    \end{gathered}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-ei-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
            <p>
              Here $r$ is the perpendicular distance to $dV$ from the
              axis through $P$ in direction $\hat{a}$.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer warning" id="rem-wm">
          <p class="envHeader">Warning: Mass moments of inertia are different to area moments of inertia.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              In solid mechanics we use a quantity called the <em>area
              moment of inertia</em> (units $\rm m^2$), which is very
              similar to the moment of inertia expression above except
              that there is no density $\rho$ in the integral.
            </p>
            <p>
              When we need to distinguish between these different
              moments of inertia, we can call <a
              href="#rem-ei">#rem-ei</a> the <em>mass moment of
              inertia</em>. In dynamics and in general usage the plain
              phrase <em>moment of inertia</em> normally refers to the
              mass variant, but it's always important to check that we
              are using the correct mass or area variant (they have
              different units, which sometimes helps to check).
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          Observe that the moment of inertia is proportional to the
          mass, so that doubling the mass of an object will also
          double its moment of inertia. In addition, the moment of
          inertia is proportional to the square of the size of the
          object, so that doubling every dimension of an object
          (height, width, etc) will cause it to have four times the
          moment of inertia.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-ec">
          <p class="envHeader">Moments of inertia about coordinate axes through point $P$.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{P,\hat\imath} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (y^2 + z^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
              I_{P,\hat\jmath} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (z^2 + x^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
              I_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz
              \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Here $(x,y,z)$ are the coordinates in the body measured from point $P$.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <canvas id="rem-ec-c" width="300" height="200" class="floatRight">
            </canvas>
            <p>
              The distance $r$ in the moment of inertia integral <a
              href="#rem-ei">#rem-ei</a> is the <em>perpendicular</em>
              distance from the axis of rotation to the infinitesimal
              volume $dV$. If we are using rectangular coordinates
              $(x,y,z)$ measured from point $P$, and the axis of
              rotation is one of the coordinate axes, then the
              perpendicular distance is very simple.
            </p>
            <p>
              As an example, consider the case when the axis of
              rotation is the $\hat{k}$ axis, as shown in the
              figure. Then the perpendicular distance $r$ satisfies
              $r^2 = x^2 + y^2$, giving the coordinate expression
              above. The other two coordinate axes are similar.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer exampleProblem" id="rem-xs">
          <p class="envHeader">Example Problem: Moment of inertia of a square plate.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <div class="question">
              <canvas id="rem-xs-c" width="300" height="200" class="floatRight">
              </canvas>
              <p>
                A solid square uniform plate has mass $m$, side-length
                $\ell$, and thickness $h$. What is the moment of
                inertia about the axis through the center of mass $C$
                in the perpendicular direction $\hat{k}$?
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="envContainer solution">
              <div class="envBody">
                <canvas id="rem-xs-c3" width="300" height="200" class="floatRight">
                </canvas>
                <p>
                  We will use the coordinate formula <a
                  href="#rem-ec">#rem-ec</a>. To do this, we measure
                  the position from the point $C$ about which we are
                  computing the moment of inertia, so the coordinate
                  origin is at $C$. The figure to the right shows the
                  3D configuration of the body, where we see that the
                  $x$-coordinate range of the body is $-\ell/2$ to
                  $\ell/2$, and the same for the $y$-coordinate, while
                  the $z$-coordinate ranges from $-h/2$ to $h/2$.
                </p>
                <p>
                  Taking the density of the plate to be $\rho$, we
                  thus have:

                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2}
                  \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \left[
                  \rho \left(\frac{1}{3}x^3 + y^2 x\right)\right]_{x = -\ell/2}^{x = \ell/2} \,dy\,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2}
                  \rho \left(\frac{1}{12}\ell^3 + y^2 \ell \right) \,dy\,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \left[
                  \rho \left(\frac{1}{12}\ell^3 y + \frac{1}{3} y^3 \ell \right) \right]_{y = -\ell/2}^{y = \ell/2} \,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2}
                  \rho \left(\frac{1}{12}\ell^4 + \frac{1}{12} \ell^4 \right) \,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \rho \frac{1}{6}\ell^4 \,dz \\
                  &amp;= \left[ \rho \frac{1}{6}\ell^4 z \right]_{z = -h/2}^{z = h/2} \\
                  &amp;= \rho \frac{1}{6}\ell^4 h.
                  \end{aligned}\]

                  The total mass of the plate is $m = \rho \ell^2 h$,
                  so we can write the moment of inertia as

                  \[I_{C,\hat{k}} = \frac{1}{6} m \ell^2.\]

                  The square plate moment of inertia is actually a
                  special case of the rectangular prism formula <a
                  href="#rem-er">#rem-er</a> with $\ell_y = \ell_z =
                  \ell$.
                </p>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol">
        <div id="rem-i3" class="infoBox factBox">
          <p>
            We are always considering the moment of inertia to be a
            scalar value $I$, which is valid for rotation about a
            fixed axis. For more complicated dynamics with tumbling
            motion about multiple axes simultaneously, it turns out
            that it is necessary to consider the full $3 \times 3$
            <i>moment of inertia matrix</i>:

            \[
            I = \begin{bmatrix}
            I_{xx} &amp; I_{xy} &amp; I_{xz} \\
            I_{yx} &amp; I_{yy} &amp; I_{yz} \\
            I_{zx} &amp; I_{zy} &amp; I_{zz}
            \end{bmatrix}
            \]

            The three scalar moments of inertia from <a
            href="#rem-ec">#rem-ec</a> appear on the diagonal as the
            terms $I_{xx} = I_{\hat\imath}$, $I_{yy} =
            I_{\hat\jmath}$, etc. The off-diagonal terms are called
            the <i>products of inertia</i> and are given by

            \[
            I_{xy} = -\iiint_{\mathcal{B}} \rho xy \,dx\,dy\,dz,
            \]

            and similarly for the other terms. The angular momentum of
            a rigid body is given by $\vec{H} = I \vec\omega$, which
            is the matrix product of the moment of inertia matrix with
            the angular velocity vector. This is important in advanced
            dynamics applications such as unbalanced rotating shafts
            and the precession of gyroscopes.
          </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rem-si" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Transforming and combining moments of inertia
        </h2>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-el">
          <p class="envHeader">Parallel axis theorem.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[I_{P,\hat{a}} = I_{C,\hat{a}} + m \, d^2\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Here $d$ is the perpendicular distance between the axes
              through $P$ and $C$ in direction $\hat{a}$, so $d = \|
              \operatorname*{Comp}(\vec{r}_{CP}, \hat{a})\|$.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer warning" id="rem-wl">
          <p class="envHeader">Warning: Parallel axis theorem must start from center of mass $C$.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer exampleProblem" id="rem-xc">
          <p class="envHeader">Example Problem: Moment of inertia of a square plate about a corner.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <div class="question">
              <canvas id="rem-xc-c" width="300" height="200" class="floatRight">
              </canvas>
              <p>
                A solid uniform square plate has mass $m$, side-length
                $\ell$, and thickness $h$. What is the moment of
                inertia about the axis through the corner $P$ in the
                perpendicular direction $\hat{k}$?
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="envContainer solution">
              <div class="envBody">
                <p>
                  We can re-use our solution to Example Problem <a
                  href="#rem-xs">#rem-xs</a>, where we computed the
                  moment of inertia of a square place about the center
                  to be $I_{C,\hat{k}} = \frac{1}{6} m \ell^2$. The
                  parallel axis theorem <a href="#rem-el">#rem-el</a>
                  now gives:

                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  I_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= I_{C,\hat{k}} + m \, {r_{CP}}^2 \\
                  &amp;= \frac{1}{6} m \ell^2
                  + m \left( \left(\frac{\ell}{2}\right)^2 + \left(\frac{\ell}{2}\right)^2 \right) \\
                  &amp;= \frac{2}{3} m \ell^2.
                  \end{aligned}\]
                </p>
                <canvas id="rem-xc-c3" width="300" height="200" class="floatRight">
                </canvas>
                <p>
                  To check our answer, we can compute the corner
                  moment of inertia directly by integrating with
                  formula <a href="#rem-ec">#rem-ec</a>. To do this,
                  we put the coordinate origin at the point $P$ about
                  which we wish to find the moment of inertia, as
                  shown in 3D to the right. From this we see that the
                  $x$ range is $0$ to $\ell$, the same for the $y$
                  range, and the $z$ range is $-h/2$ to $h/2$.
                </p>
                <p>
                  The integral formula now gives:

                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  I_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \int_0^{\ell} \int_{0}^{\ell}
                  \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \int_{0}^{\ell} \left[
                  \rho \left(\frac{1}{3}x^3 + y^2 x\right)\right]_{x = 0}^{x = \ell} \,dy\,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \int_{0}^{\ell}
                  \rho \left(\frac{1}{3}\ell^3 + y^2 \ell \right) \,dy\,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \left[
                  \rho \left(\frac{1}{3}\ell^3 y + \frac{1}{3} y^3 \ell \right) \right]_{y = 0}^{y = \ell} \,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2}
                  \rho \left(\frac{1}{3}\ell^4 + \frac{1}{3} \ell^4 \right) \,dz \\
                  &amp;= \int_{-h/2}^{h/2} \rho \frac{2}{3}\ell^4 \,dz \\
                  &amp;= \left[ \rho \frac{2}{3}\ell^4 z \right]_{z = -h/2}^{z = h/2} \\
                  &amp;= \rho \frac{2}{3}\ell^4 h.
                  \end{aligned}\]

                  The total mass of the plate is $m = \rho \ell^2 h$,
                  so we can write the final expression for the moment of inertia is

                  \[I_{P,\hat{k}} = \frac{2}{3} m \ell^2.\]

                  This is the same as the expression we obtained above
                  using the parallel axis theorem, but clearly the
                  parallel axis theorem version is much easier.
                </p>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          One consequence of the parallel axis theorem is that the
          moment of inertia can only increase as we move the rotation
          point $P$ away from the center of mass $C$. This means that
          the point with the lowest moment of inertia is always the
          center of mass itself.
        </p>
        <p>
          A second consequence of the parallel axis theorem is that
          moving the point $P$ along the direction $\hat{a}$ doesn't
          change the moment of inertia, because the axis of rotation
          is not changing as the point moves along the axis itself.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-ea">
          <p class="envHeader">Adding moments of inertia.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[I_{P,\hat{a}} = I^{\mathcal{B}_1}_{P,\hat{a}} + I^{\mathcal{B}_2}_{P,\hat{a}}\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer exampleProblem" id="rem-xl">
          <p class="envHeader">Example Problem: Moment of inertia of an L-shaped plate.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <div class="question">
              <canvas id="rem-xl-c" width="300" height="200" class="floatRight">
              </canvas>
              <p>
                A solid uniform L-shaped plate has mass $m$ and
                dimensions as shown. What is the moment of inertia
                about the axis through the corner $P$ in the
                perpendicular direction $\hat{k}$?
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="envContainer solution">
              <div class="envBody">
                <canvas id="rem-xl-cd" width="300" height="200" class="floatRight">
                </canvas>
                <p>
                  We can re-use our solution to Example Problem <a
                  href="#rem-xs">#rem-xs</a>, where we computed the
                  moment of inertia of a square place about the center
                  to be $I_{C,\hat{k}} = \frac{1}{6} m \ell^2$,
                  together with parallel axis theorem <a
                  href="#rem-el">#rem-el</a> and the additive theorem
                  <a href="#rem-ea">#rem-ea</a>.
                </p>
                <p>
                  To do this, we must first realize that the L-shape
                  can be decomposed into four square plates, as
                  shown. Each small square body has the same mass and
                  the same moment of inertia about its center, so:

                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  m_1 &amp;= \frac{1}{4} m \\
                  I^{\mathcal{B}_1}_{C_1,\hat{k}} &amp;=
                  \frac{1}{6} m_1 (2d)^2
                  = \frac{1}{6} \left(\frac{1}{4} m\right) 4d^2
                  = \frac{1}{6} m d^2,
                  \end{aligned}\]

                  and similarly for each other small square body.
                </p>
                <p>
                  Now individual moments of inertia about the corner
                  $P$ can be found using the parallel axis
                  theorem:

                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  I^{\mathcal{B}_1}_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= I^{\mathcal{B}_1}_{C_1,\hat{k}}
                  + m_1 \, {r_{C_1P}}^2
                  = \frac{1}{6} m d^2
                  + \left(\frac{1}{4} m\right) \left(d^2 + (3d)^2\right)
                  = \frac{8}{3} m d^2 \\
                  I^{\mathcal{B}_2}_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= I^{\mathcal{B}_2}_{C_2,\hat{k}}
                  + m_2 \, {r_{C_2P}}^2
                  = \frac{1}{6} m d^2
                  + \left(\frac{1}{4} m\right) \left(d^2 + d^2\right)
                  = \frac{2}{3} m d^2 \\
                  I^{\mathcal{B}_3}_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= I^{\mathcal{B}_1}_{P,\hat{k}}
                  = \frac{8}{3} m d^2 \\
                  I^{\mathcal{B}_4}_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= I^{\mathcal{B}_4}_{C_4,\hat{k}}
                  + m_4 \, {r_{C_4P}}^2
                  = \frac{1}{6} m d^2
                  + \left(\frac{1}{4} m\right) \left((5d)^2 + d^2\right)
                  = \frac{20}{3} m d^2.
                  \end{aligned}\]

                  Here we observed that body $\mathcal{B}_3$ will have
                  the same moment of inertia as $\mathcal{B}_1$,
                  saving some computation.
                </p>
                <p>
                  Combining the individual moments of inertia now
                  gives us the total:

                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  I_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= I^{\mathcal{B}_1}_{P,\hat{k}}
                  + I^{\mathcal{B}_2}_{P,\hat{k}} + I^{\mathcal{B}_3}_{P,\hat{k}}
                  + I^{\mathcal{B}_4}_{P,\hat{k}} \\
                  &amp;= \frac{8}{3} m d^2 + \frac{2}{3} m d^2 + \frac{8}{3} m d^2 + \frac{20}{3} m d^2\\
                  &amp;= \frac{38}{3} m d^2.
                  \end{aligned}\]

                  We could also directly compute the total moment of
                  inertia using the integral formula <a
                  href="#rem-ec">#rem-ec</a>, which would be quite
                  complex.
                </p>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rem-sb" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Basic shapes
        </h2>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-ep">
          <p class="envHeader">Point mass: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-ep-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= m r^2
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-er">
          <p class="envHeader">Rectangular prism: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-er-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_{C,\hat\imath} &amp;= \frac{1}{12} m ({\ell_y}^2 + {\ell_z}^2) \\
                    I_{C,\hat\jmath} &amp;= \frac{1}{12} m ({\ell_z}^2 + {\ell_x}^2) \\
                    I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \frac{1}{12} m ({\ell_x}^2 + {\ell_y}^2)
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              The calculation for any of the axes is the same, so we
              will only write out the derivation of $I_{C,\hat{k}}$
              here. We use <a href="#rem-ec">#rem-ec</a>, which gives:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell_z/2}^{\ell_z/2} \int_{-\ell_y/2}^{\ell_y/2} \int_{-\ell_x/2}^{\ell_x/2}
              \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell_z/2}^{\ell_z/2} \int_{-\ell_y/2}^{\ell_y/2} \left[
              \rho \left(\frac{1}{3}x^3 + y^2 x\right)\right]_{x = -\ell_x/2}^{x = \ell_x/2} \,dy\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell_z/2}^{\ell_z/2} \int_{-\ell_y/2}^{\ell_y/2}
              \rho \left(\frac{1}{12}{\ell_x}^3 + y^2 \ell_x \right) \,dy\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell_z/2}^{\ell_z/2} \left[
              \rho \left(\frac{1}{12}{\ell_x}^3 y + \frac{1}{3} y^3 \ell_x \right)
              \right]_{y = -\ell_y/2}^{y = \ell_y/2} \,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell_z/2}^{\ell_z/2}
              \rho \left(\frac{1}{12}{\ell_x}^3 \ell_y + \frac{1}{12} \ell_x {\ell_y}^3 \right) \,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell_z/2}^{\ell_z/2} \rho \ell_x \ell_y
              \frac{1}{12}\left( {\ell_x}^2 + {\ell_y}^2\right) \,dz \\
              &amp;= \left[ \rho \ell_x \ell_y
              \frac{1}{12}\left( {\ell_x}^2 + {\ell_y}^2\right) z \right]_{z = -\ell_z/2}^{z = \ell_z/2} \\
              &amp;= \rho \ell_x \ell_y \ell_z \frac{1}{12}\left( {\ell_x}^2 + {\ell_y}^2\right).
              \end{aligned}\]

              The total mass of the plate is $m = \rho \ell_x \ell_y
              \ell_z$, so we can write the moment of inertia as

              \[I_{C,\hat{k}} = \frac{1}{12} m \left( {\ell_x}^2 + {\ell_y}^2\right).\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-ey">
          <p class="envHeader">Cylindrical thick shell: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-ey-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_{C,\hat\imath} &amp;= I_{C,\hat\jmath} = \frac{1}{12} m (3({r_1}^2 + {r_2}^2) + \ell^2) \\
                    I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \frac{1}{2} m ({r_1}^2 + {r_2}^2)
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              To compute the integrals in <a
              href="#rem-ec">#rem-ec</a> it is convenient to switch to
              <a href="rvy.xhtml">cylindrical coordinates</a>:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              x &amp;= r \cos\theta \\
              y &amp;= r \sin\theta \\
              z &amp;= z.
              \end{aligned}\]

              The Jacobian of this coordinate transformation is:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              J &amp;= \begin{vmatrix}
              \frac{\partial x}{\partial r} &amp; \frac{\partial x}{\partial \theta} &amp; \frac{\partial x}{\partial z} \\
              \frac{\partial y}{\partial r} &amp; \frac{\partial y}{\partial \theta} &amp; \frac{\partial y}{\partial z} \\
              \frac{\partial z}{\partial r} &amp; \frac{\partial z}{\partial \theta} &amp; \frac{\partial z}{\partial z}
              \end{vmatrix}
              = \begin{vmatrix}
              \cos\theta &amp; -r \sin\theta &amp; 0 \\
              \sin\theta &amp;  r \cos\theta &amp; 0 \\
              0 &amp; 0 &amp; 1
              \end{vmatrix}
              = r \cos^2\theta + r \sin^2\theta
              = r.
              \end{aligned}\]

              Starting with the $\hat{k}$ axis, the moment of inertia
              is thus:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi} \int_{r_1}^{r_2}
              \rho \left( (r \cos\theta)^2 + (r \sin\theta)^2 \right) \,J \,dr\,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi} \int_{r_1}^{r_2}
              \rho r^3 \,dr\,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi} \left[
              \rho \frac{1}{4} r^4 \right]_{r = r_1}^{r = r_2} \,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi} \frac{1}{4} \rho \left(
              {r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4 \right) \,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \left[ \frac{1}{4} \rho \left(
              {r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4 \right) \theta \right]_{\theta = 0}^{\theta = 2\pi} \,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \frac{\pi}{2} \rho \left(
              {r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4 \right) \,dz \\
              &amp;= \left[ \frac{\pi}{2} \rho \left(
              {r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4 \right) z \right]_{z = -\ell/2}^{z = \ell/2} \\
              &amp;= \frac{\pi}{2} \rho \ell \left(
              {r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4 \right).
              \end{aligned}\]

              The total mass of the cylindrical shell is $m = \rho
              (\pi {r_2}^2 - \pi {r_1}^2) \ell$, so we can write the
              moment of inertia as

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{C,\hat{k}}
              &amp;= \frac{1}{2} \frac{m}{{r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2}
              \left( {r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4 \right) \\
              &amp;= \frac{1}{2} \frac{m}{{r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2}
              \left( {r_2}^2 + {r_1}^2 \right) \left( {r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2 \right) \\
              &amp;= \frac{1}{2} m
              \left( {r_2}^2 + {r_1}^2 \right).
              \end{aligned}\]

              Due to rotational symmetry of the cylinder, the moment
              of inertia will be the same about any axis orthogonal to
              $\hat{k}$, so we will just write out the derivation for
              $I_{C,\hat\imath}$ here. We again use <a
              href="#rem-ec">#rem-ec</a> in <a
              href="rvy.xhtml">cylindrical coordinates</a>, giving:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{C,\hat\imath} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (y^2 + z^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi} \int_{r_1}^{r_2}
              \rho \left( (r \sin\theta)^2 + z^2 \right) \,J \,dr\,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi} \int_{r_1}^{r_2}
              \rho \left( r^3 \sin^2\theta + r z^2 \right) \,dr\,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi} \left[
              \rho \left( \frac{1}{4} r^4 \sin^2\theta + \frac{1}{2} r^2 z^2 \right)
              \right]_{r = r_1}^{r = r_2} \,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi}
              \rho \left( \frac{1}{4} ({r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4) \sin^2\theta
              + \frac{1}{2} ({r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2) z^2 \right) \,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \int_0^{2\pi}
              \rho \left( \frac{1}{8} ({r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4) (1 - \cos 2\theta)
              + \frac{1}{2} ({r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2) z^2 \right) \,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \left[
              \rho \left( \frac{1}{8} ({r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4)
              \left(\theta - \frac{1}{2} \sin 2\theta\right)
              + \frac{1}{2} ({r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2) z^2 \theta \right)
              \right]_{\theta = 0}^{\theta = 2\pi} \,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\ell/2}^{\ell/2} \rho \left( \frac{\pi}{4} ({r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4)
              + \pi ({r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2) z^2 \right) \,d\theta\,dz \\
              &amp;= \left[ \rho \left( \frac{\pi}{4} ({r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4) z
              + \pi ({r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2) \frac{1}{3} z^3 \right) \right]_{z = -\ell/2}^{z = \ell/2} \\
              &amp;= \rho \left( \frac{\pi}{4} ({r_2}^3 - {r_1}^3) \ell
              + \pi ({r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2) \frac{1}{12} \ell^3 \right) \\
              &amp;= \frac{1}{12} \rho \pi ({r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2) \ell \left( 3 ({r_2}^2 + {r_1}^2)
              + \ell^2 \right).
              \end{aligned}\]

              In the last line we again used the factorization
              $({r_2}^4 - {r_1}^4) = ({r_2}^2 + {r_1}^2) ({r_2}^2 -
              {r_1}^2)$. Now we can substitute in the total mass $m =
              \rho \pi ({r_2}^2 - {r_1}^2) \ell$ to obtain:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{C,\hat\imath}
              &amp;= \frac{1}{12} m \left( 3 ({r_2}^2 + {r_1}^2)
              + \ell^2 \right).
              \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-es">
          <p class="envHeader">Spherical thick shell: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-es-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_C &amp;= \frac{2}{5} m \left(\frac{{r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5}{{r_2}^3 - {r_1}^3}\right)
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
            <p>
              All axes through $C$ have the same moment of inertia.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              To compute the integrals in <a
              href="#rem-ec">#rem-ec</a> it is convenient to switch to
              <a href="rvs.xhtml">spherical coordinates</a>:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              x &amp;= r \cos\theta \cos\phi \\
              y &amp;= r \sin\theta \cos\phi \\
              z &amp;= r \sin\phi.
              \end{aligned}\]

              The Jacobian of this coordinate transformation is:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              J &amp;= \begin{vmatrix}
              \frac{\partial x}{\partial r} &amp; \frac{\partial x}{\partial \theta} &amp; \frac{\partial x}{\partial \phi} \\
              \frac{\partial y}{\partial r} &amp; \frac{\partial y}{\partial \theta} &amp; \frac{\partial y}{\partial \phi} \\
              \frac{\partial z}{\partial r} &amp; \frac{\partial z}{\partial \theta} &amp; \frac{\partial z}{\partial \phi}
              \end{vmatrix} \\
              &amp;= \begin{vmatrix}
              \cos\theta \cos\phi &amp; -r \sin\theta \cos\phi &amp; -r \cos\theta \sin\phi \\
              \sin\theta \cos\phi &amp; r \cos\theta \cos\phi &amp; -r \sin\theta \sin\phi \\
              \sin\phi &amp; 0 &amp; r \cos\phi
              \end{vmatrix} \\
              &amp;= \sin\phi (r^2 \sin^2\theta \cos\phi \sin\phi + r^2 \cos^2\theta \cos\phi \sin\phi) \\
              &amp;\quad + r \cos\phi (r \cos^2\theta \cos^2\phi + \sin^2\theta \cos^2\phi) \\
              &amp;= r^2 \sin^2\phi \cos\phi + r^2 \cos^3\phi \\
              &amp;= r^2 \cos\phi.
              \end{aligned}\]

              Due to spherical symmetry all axes through $C$ will have
              the same moment of inertia. We will compute
              $I_{C,\hat{k}}$, which is:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \iiint_\mathcal{B} \rho (x^2 + y^2) \,dx\,dy\,dz \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\pi/2}^{\pi/2} \int_{-\pi}^{\pi} \int_{r_1}^{r_2}
              \rho \left( (r \cos\theta \cos\phi)^2 + (r \sin\theta \cos\phi)^2 \right) \,J \,dr\,d\theta\,d\phi \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\pi/2}^{\pi/2} \int_{-\pi}^{\pi} \int_{r_1}^{r_2}
              \rho r^4 \cos^3\phi \,dr\,d\theta\,d\phi \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\pi/2}^{\pi/2} \int_{-\pi}^{\pi} \left[
              \rho \frac{1}{5} r^5 \cos^3\phi \right]_{r = r_1}^{r = r_2} \,d\theta\,d\phi \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\pi/2}^{\pi/2} \int_{-\pi}^{\pi}
              \rho \frac{1}{5} ({r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5) \cos^3\phi \,d\theta\,d\phi \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\pi/2}^{\pi/2} \left[
              \rho \frac{1}{5} ({r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5) \cos^3\phi \, \theta
              \right]_{\theta = -\pi}^{\theta = \pi} \,d\phi \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\pi/2}^{\pi/2}
              \rho \frac{2\pi}{5} ({r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5) \cos^3\phi \,d\phi \\
              &amp;= \int_{-\pi/2}^{\pi/2}
              \rho \frac{2\pi}{5} ({r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5) \frac{1}{4} (\cos 3\phi + 3\cos\phi) \,d\phi \\
              &amp;= \left[ \rho \frac{2\pi}{5} ({r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5) \frac{1}{4}
              \left(\frac{1}{3} \sin 3\phi + 3\sin\phi\right) \right]_{\phi = -\pi/2}^{\phi = \pi/2} \\
              &amp;= \rho \frac{2\pi}{5} ({r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5) \frac{1}{4}
              \left(-\frac{2}{3} + 6\right) \\
              &amp;= \frac{8}{15} \rho \pi ({r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5).
              \end{aligned}\]

              The total mass of the spherical shell is $m = \rho
              \left(\frac{4}{3} \pi {r_2}^3 - \frac{4}{3} \pi
              {r_1}^3\right)$, so we can write the moment of inertia
              as

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{C,\hat{k}}
              &amp;= \frac{8}{15} m \frac{3}{4} \frac{1}{{r_2}^3 - {r_1}^3} ({r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5) \\
              &amp;= \frac{2}{5} m \left(\frac{{r_2}^5 - {r_1}^5}{{r_2}^3 - {r_1}^3}\right).
              \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol">
        <div id="rem-ie" class="infoBox factBox">
          <p>
            Determining $I$ experimentally from oscillation.
          </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rem-ss" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Simplified shapes
        </h2>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-eo">
          <p class="envHeader">Rod: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-eo-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \frac{1}{12} m \ell^2 \\
                    I_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= \frac{1}{3} m \ell^2 \\
                    I_{C,\hat{e}_r} &amp;= I_{P,\hat{e}_r} = 0
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              A rod is assumed to be a shape with infinitesimally
              small cross-section. We can use the formula <a
              href="#rem-ey">#rem-ey</a> for a cylinder with zero
              radii $r_1 = r_2 = 0$. The coordinates here are set up
              so that $\hat{k}$ is orthogonal to the rod axis and
              $\hat{e}_r$ is along the axis, so <a
              href="#rem-ey">#rem-ey</a> gives:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \frac{1}{12} m (3({r_1}^2 + {r_2}^2) + \ell^2)
              = \frac{1}{12} m \ell^2 \\
              I_{C,\hat{e}_r} &amp;= \frac{1}{2} m ({r_1}^2 + {r_2}^2) = 0.
              \end{aligned}\]

              To find the moment of inertia about the end point $P$ we
              can use the parallel axis theorem <a
              href="#rem-el">#rem-el</a>. This results is:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_{P,\hat{k}} &amp;= I_{C,\hat{k}} + m {r_{CP}}^2 \\
              &amp;= \frac{1}{12} m \ell^2 + m \left(\frac{\ell}{2}\right)^2 \\
              &amp;= \frac{1}{3} m \ell^2.
              \end{aligned}\]

              The moment of inertia $I_{P,\hat{e}_r}$ is still zero,
              because $\vec{r}_{CP}$ is parallel to $\hat{e}_r$.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-ek">
          <p class="envHeader">Solid cylinder or disk: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-ek-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_{C,\hat\imath} &amp;= I_{C,\hat\jmath} = \frac{1}{12} m (3r^2 + \ell^2) \\
                    I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= \frac{1}{2} m r^2
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              The solid cylinder expressions are simply the
              cylindrical thick shell formulas <a
              href="#rem-ey">#rem-ey</a> with the inner radius set to
              $r_1 = 0$ and the outer radius $r_2 = r$.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-eh">
          <p class="envHeader">Hollow cylinder or hoop: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-eh-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_{C,\hat\imath} &amp;= I_{C,\hat\jmath} = \frac{1}{12} m (6 r^2 + \ell^2) \\
                    I_{C,\hat{k}} &amp;= m r^2
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              The hollow cylinder expressions can be found from
              cylindrical thick shell formulas <a
              href="#rem-ey">#rem-ey</a> by taking the same value for
              both inner and outer radii, so that $r_1 = r_2 = r$.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-eb">
          <p class="envHeader">Solid ball: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-eb-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_C &amp;= \frac{2}{5} m r^2
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
            <p>
              All axes through $C$ have the same moment of inertia.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              The solid ball moment of inertia can be directly
              obtained from the spherical thick shell expression <a
              href="#rem-es">#rem-es</a> with inner radius $r_1 = 0$
              and outer radius $r_2 = r$.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rem-ew">
          <p class="envHeader">Hollow sphere: moments of inertia</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <table class="momentInertia">
              <tr>
                <td>
                  <canvas id="rem-ew-c" width="300" height="300">
                  </canvas>
                </td>
                <td>
                  <p>
                    \[\begin{aligned}
                    I_C &amp;= \frac{2}{3} m r^2
                    \end{aligned}\]
                  </p>
                </td>
              </tr>
            </table>
            <p>
              All axes through $C$ have the same moment of inertia.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              A hollow sphere moment of inertia is the same as that
              for the spherical thick shell <a
              href="#rem-es">#rem-es</a> with inner radius and outer
              radius both set to $r_1 = r_2 = r$. Some care is needed
              here, however, as a simple substitution into the
              spherical thick shell expression would give the
              undefined value $0 / 0$.
            </p>
            <p>
              Instead we need to set $r_2 = r$ and then to take the
              limit as $r_1 \to r$ using l'Hôpital's rule:

              \[\begin{aligned}
              I_C &amp;= \lim_{r_1 \to r} \frac{2}{5} m
              \left(\frac{r^5 - {r_1}^5}{r^3 - {r_1}^3}\right) \\
              &amp;= \lim_{r_1 \to r} \frac{2}{5} m
              \left(\frac{\frac{d}{d r_1}\left(r^5 - {r_1}^5\right)}{
              \frac{d}{d r_1}\left(r^3 - {r_1}^3\right)}\right) \\
              &amp;= \lim_{r_1 \to r} \frac{2}{5} m
              \left(\frac{5 {r_1}^4}{3 {r_1}^2}\right) \\
              &amp;= \lim_{r_1 \to r} \frac{2}{3} m {r_1}^2 \\
              &amp;= \frac{2}{3} m r^2.
              \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
