<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head profile="http://www.w3.org/2005/10/profile">
    <link rel="icon" type="image/png" href="favicon.png" />
    <title>
      Newton's equations
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="ren.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">

  var _gaq = _gaq || [];
  _gaq.push(['_setAccount', 'UA-37625161-1']);
  _gaq.push(['_trackPageview']);

  (function() {
    var ga = document.createElement('script'); ga.type = 'text/javascript'; ga.async = true;
    ga.src = ('https:' == document.location.protocol ? 'https://ssl' : 'http://www') + '.google-analytics.com/ga.js';
    var s = document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(ga, s);
  })();

</script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="container">
      <div class="header"><h1>TAM 212: Introductory Dynamics</h1></div>
      <div class="navbar">
        <ul><li><a href="index.xhtml" id="navHome">Home</a></li><li><a href="info.xhtml" id="navInfo">Info</a></li><li><a href="people.xhtml" id="navPeople">People</a></li><li><a href="sched.xhtml" id="navSched">Schedule</a></li><li><a href="ref.xhtml" id="navRef">Reference</a></li><li><a href="apps.xhtml" id="navApps">Applications</a></li></ul>
      </div>
      <div class="browserWarning">
        <strong>Warning:</strong>
        This website has only been tested on Chrome version 24 and higher. Your browser may not be fully supported.
      </div>
      <div class="mainBlock">
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="ren" class="contentCol">
        <h1>
          Newton's equations
        </h1>
        <p>
          Newton's equations relate the acceleration $\vec{a}$ of a
          point mass with mass $m$ to the total applied force
          $\vec{F}$ on the mass (sum of all applied forces). They are:
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="ren-en">
          <p class="envHeader">Newton's equations.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[\vec{F} = m \vec{a}\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          There is no derivation for Newton's equations, because they
          are an assumed model for dynamics. We can only verify them
          by comparing with experimental evidence, which confirms
          Newtonian dynamics for non-relativistic and non-quantum
          systems.
        </p>
        <p>
          Another way to write Newton's equations relies on the linear
          momentum:
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="ren-em">
          <p class="envHeader">Linear momentum of a point mass.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[\vec{p} = m\dot{\vec{v}}\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          Using the linear momentum, Newton's equations are:
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="ren-ep">
          <p class="envHeader">Newton's equations in momentum form.</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[\vec{F} = \dot{\vec{p}}\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              If we differentiate the linear momentum with respect to
              time then we obtain

              \[\frac{d}{dt} \vec{p} = \frac{d}{dt} (m \vec{v})
              = m \dot{\vec{v}} = m \vec{a} = \vec{F}. \]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer warning" id="ren-wv">
          <p class="envHeader">Warning: Variable mass</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              For a system with variable mass, such as a rocket burning
              up its fuel, it is tempting to write
              
              \[\vec{F} = \frac{d}{dt} (m \vec{v})
              = \dot{m} \vec{v} + m \dot{\vec{v}}\]
              
              and to then rearrange to find the acceleration:
              
              \[m \vec{a} = F - \dot{m} \vec{v}.\]
              
              But this is wrong! The acceleration must depend not only
              on the rate of mass loss, but also the speed with which
              the lost mass is ejected.
            </p>
            <p>
              The right way to calculate the acceleration of rockets is
              to consider the center of mass of the total system (rocket
              plus ejected mass) and to use the <a href="">equation for
              the center of mass of a many-body system</a>. This results
              in the <a
              href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tsiolkovsky_rocket_equation">Tsiolkovsky
              rocket equation</a>:
              
              \[m \vec{a} = \vec{v}_{\rm e} \dot{m},\]
              
              where the acceleration $\vec{a}$ of the rocket is
              determined by the rate of mass loss $\dot{m}$ and the
              velocity $\vec{v}_{\rm e}$ of the ejected mass relative to
              the rocket.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol">
        <div id="ren-ir" class="infoBox factBox">
          <p>
            If we have objects which are either very massive, very
            small, or moving very fast, then Newton's equations do not
            provide a good model of their motion. Instead we must use
            Einstein's equations of <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_relativity">general
            relativity</a> (for massive and fast objects) or the
            equations of <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_mechanics">quantum
            mechanics</a> (for very small objects). Unfortunately,
            these two theories cannot be used together, so we
            currently have no good models for objects which are
            simultaneously very small and very massive, such as <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micro_black_hole">micro
            black holes</a> or the universe shortly after the <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Bang">big
            bang</a>. Physicists are currently trying to reconcile
            general relativity with quantum mechanics by devising a
            new set of equations (sometimes called <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_gravity">quantum
            gravity</a> or a <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_everything">theory
            of everything</a>). Current possibilities for new
            equations include <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_theory">string
            theory</a> and <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loop_quantum_gravity">loop
            quantum gravity</a>, but none of these are generally
            accepted yet.
          </p>
          <p>
            It is important to remember that all of these different
            equations are only models of reality and are not actually
            real:
          </p>
          <blockquote>
            “All models are wrong. Some models are useful.”
            <br />
            — <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_E._P._Box">George Box</a>
          </blockquote>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="ren-sa" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Method of assumed forces and method of assumed motion
        </h2>
        <p>
          Newton's equations can be used in two main ways. Either we
          know the forces and we use this to compute the acceleration
          of a mass, or we know the acceleration and use this to
          compute the forces.
        </p>
        <table class="basic">
          <tr>
            <th>Method of assumed forces:</th>
            <td>Know $\vec{F}$</td>
            <td>$\Longrightarrow$</td>
            <td>Compute $\vec{a}$</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <th>Method of assumed motion:</th>
            <td>Know $\vec{a}$</td>
            <td>$\Longrightarrow$</td>
            <td>Compute $\vec{F}$</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
        <p>
          Of course there are other possibilities from these two, such
          as knowing the vertical component of the force and the
          horizontal component of acceleration, and then computing the
          missing components of each.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer exampleProblem" id="ren-ef">
          <p class="envHeader">Example Problem: Method of assumed forces</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <div class="question">
              <p>
                A cannonball of mass $m$ is fired from the origin with
                initial velocity $\vec{v}_0$ and then experiences a
                force $\vec{F}_{\rm g} = -m g \hat{\jmath}$ due to
                gravity and a wind force $F_{\rm w} = -C_{\rm w}
                \hat{\imath}$. What is the motion of the cannonball as
                a function of time?
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="envContainer solution">
              <div class="envBody">
                <p>
                  We can use Newton's equations to find the
                  acceleration of the cannonball, using the method of
                  assumed forces:
                
                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  m \vec{a} &amp;= \vec{F}_{\rm w} + \vec{F}_{\rm g} \\
                  \vec{a} &amp;= \frac{1}{m} \left(
                  - C_{\rm w} \hat{\imath} - m g \hat{\jmath} \right)
                  \end{aligned}\]
                </p>
                <p>
                  If $\vec{r}$ is the position vector of the
                  cannonball then we have the differential equation:
                
                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  \ddot{\vec{r}}(t) &amp;= - C_{\rm w} \hat{\imath} - m g \hat{\jmath} 
                  &amp; \vec{r}(0) &amp;= \vec{0}
                  &amp; \dot{\vec{r}}(0) &amp;= \vec{v}_0.
                  \end{aligned}\]
                
                  Because the acceleration is constant we can use the
                  <a href="">elementary motion</a> solution to find
                  the trajectory of the cannonball:
                
                  \[
                  \vec{r}(t) = \vec{v}_0 t
                  - \frac{1}{2} t^2 (C_{\rm w} \hat{\imath}
                  + m g \hat{\jmath}).
                  \]
                </p>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer exampleProblem" id="ren-em">
          <p class="envHeader">Example Problem: Method of assumed motion</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <div class="question">
              <p>
                A car of mass $m$ is observed driving on a sinusoidal
                road at a constant horizontal speed $v_0$. The road
                surface has equation $y = A \sin(k x)$, where $A$ is
                the <a href="">amplitude</a> and $k$ is the <a
                href="">wavenumber</a>. What is the force of the road
                on the car? Gravity $g$ acts vertically and assume no
                air resistance.
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="envContainer solution">
              <div class="envBody">
                <p>
                  We can determine the acceleration of the car, and
                  then use Newton's equations and method of assumed
                  motion to find the total force and thus the road
                  force. First, we find the acceleration:

                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  x(t) &amp;= x_0 + v_0 t \\
                  \vec{r}(t) &amp;= x(t)\,\hat{\imath} + y(x(t))\,\hat{\jmath} \\
                  &amp;= (x_0 + v_0 t)\,\hat{\imath} + A \sin(k x_0 + k v_0 t)\,\hat{\jmath} \\
                  \vec{a}(t) = \ddot{\vec{r}}(t)
                  &amp;= - A (k v_0)^2 \sin(k x_0 + k v_0 t)\,\hat{\jmath} \\
                  &amp;= - A (k v_0)^2 \sin(k x)\,\hat{\jmath}.
                  \end{aligned}\]

                  Given the force of gravity $\vec{F}_{\rm g} = - m g
                  \,\hat{\jmath}$ and the road force $\vec{F}_{\rm
                  r}$, Newton's equations give the forces as:

                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  \vec{F}_{\rm r} + \vec{F}_{\rm g} &amp;= m \vec{a} \\
                  \vec{F}_{\rm r} &amp;= - m A (k v_0)^2 \sin(k x)\,\hat{\jmath} - m g \,\hat{\jmath} \\
                  &amp;= - m \Big(g + A (k v_0)^2 \sin(k x)\Big) \,\hat{\jmath},
                  \end{aligned}\]
                  
                  where we have solved for the road force on the car.
                </p>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    </div>
      <div class="footer">
        <p class="copyright">Copyright (C) 2012-2013 Matthew West</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
