<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Elementary motions</title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">

  var _gaq = _gaq || [];
  _gaq.push(['_setAccount', 'UA-37625161-1']);
  _gaq.push(['_trackPageview']);

  (function() {
    var ga = document.createElement('script'); ga.type = 'text/javascript'; ga.async = true;
    ga.src = ('https:' == document.location.protocol ? 'https://ssl' : 'http://www') + '.google-analytics.com/ga.js';
    var s = document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(ga, s);
  })();

</script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="container">
      <div class="header"><h1>TAM 212: Introductory Dynamics</h1></div>
      <div class="navbar">
        <ul><li><a href="index.xhtml" id="navHome">Home</a></li><li><a href="info.xhtml" id="navInfo">Info</a></li><li><a href="people.xhtml" id="navPeople">People</a></li><li><a href="sched.xhtml" id="navSched">Schedule</a></li><li><a href="ref.xhtml" id="navRef">Reference</a></li><li><a href="apps.xhtml" id="navApps">Applications</a></li></ul>
      </div>
      <div class="browserWarning">
        <strong>Warning:</strong>
        This website has only been tested on Chrome version 24 and higher. Your browser may not be fully supported.
      </div>
      <div class="mainBlock">
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rke" class="contentCol">
        <h1>
          Elementary motions
        </h1>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rke-sr" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Rectilinear motion
        </h2>
        <p>Constant acceleration:</p>
        <p>
          \[\begin{aligned}
          v &amp;= v_0 + a_0 t \\
          x &amp;= x_0 + v_0 t + a_0 t^2
          \end{aligned}\]
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rke-sc" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Circular motion
        </h2>
        <p>
          Constant angular acceleration:

          \[\begin{aligned}
          v &amp;= \omega r \\
          \vec{a} &amp;= \alpha \,\hat{e}_\theta - r \omega^2 \,\hat{e}_r
          \end{aligned}\]
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rke-sr" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Questions
        </h2>
        <p>
          Question: You walking from one end of an airport to the
          other, with several moving walkways that you will use. You
          want to stop for a brief time to get your phone out of your
          bag.  To minimize your total walking time, should you stop
          when on a moving walkway or when stationary, or doesn't it
          matter?
        </p>
        <p>
          Question: You are riding your bike from home to the store
          and back, and there is a constant wind blowing, so that on
          the way there you have a headwind, but on the way back you
          have a corresponding tailwind. Assume that the wind adds a
          constant offset to your speed. Are you slower, faster, or
          the same compared to if there was no wind at all?
        </p>
        <p>
          Question: What if the wind doubles your speed when it is a
          tailwind, but halves it when it's a headwind. Are you faster
          or slower or the same?
        </p>
        <p>
          Question: Two runners are competing in a (slightly short) 40
          km long marathon. Fred runs the first 20 km at 20 km/h and
          the second 20 km at 10 km/h. Bill runs for exactly half his
          total time at 20 km/h and for the second half of his total
          time at 10 km/h. Who wins? Who has an average speed of 15
          km/h?
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
    </div>
      <div class="footer">
        <p class="copyright">Copyright (C) 2012-2013 Matthew West</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
