<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>
      Rigid bodies
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="rkg.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="rkg.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="container">
      <div class="header"><h1>TAM 212: Introductory Dynamics</h1></div>
      <div class="navbar">
        <ul>
          <li><a href="index.xhtml" id="navHome">Home</a></li>
          <li><a href="info.xhtml" id="navInfo">Info</a>
          </li><li><a href="people.xhtml" id="navPeople">People</a>
          </li><li><a href="sched.xhtml" id="navSched">Schedule</a></li>
          <li><a href="ref.xhtml" id="navRef">Reference</a>
          </li><li><a href="apps.xhtml" id="navApps">Applications</a></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="browserWarning">
        <strong>Warning:</strong>
        This website has only been tested on Chrome version 24 and higher. Your browser may not be fully supported.
      </div>
      <div class="mainBlock">
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkg" class="contentCol">
        <h1>
          Rigid bodies
        </h1>
        <p>
          A <em>rigid body</em> is an extended area of material that
          includes all the points inside it, and which moves so that
          the distances and angles between all its points remain
          constant. The location of a rigid body can be described by
          the position of one point $P$ inside it, together with the
          rotation angle of the body (one angle in 2D, three angles in
          3D).
        </p>
        <table class="basic">
          <tr class="lineBelow">
            <th></th>
            <th>location description</th>
            <th>velocity description</th>
          </tr>
          <tr class="lineBelow">
            <th>point mass</th>
            <td>position vector $\vec{r}_P$</td>
            <td>velocity vector $\vec{v}_P$</td>
          </tr>
          <tr class="lineBelow">
            <th>rigid body in 2D</th>
            <td>
              position vector $\vec{r}_P$
              <br />
              angle $\theta$
            </td>
            <td>
              velocity vector $\vec{v}_P$
              <br />
              angular velocity $\omega$
            </td>
          </tr>
          <tr class="lineBelow">
            <th>rigid body in 3D</th>
            <td>
              position vector $\vec{r}_P$
              <br />
              angles $\theta,\phi,\psi$
            </td>
            <td>
              velocity vector $\vec{v}_P$
              <br />
              angular velocity vector $\vec{\omega}$
            </td>
          </tr>
        </table>
        <p>
          Neither point masses nor rigid bodies can physically exist,
          as no body can really be a single point with no extent, and
          no extended body can be exactly rigid. Despite this, these
          are very useful models for mechanics and dynamics.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol">
        <div id="rkg-ia" class="infoBox applicationsBox">
          <ul>
            <li><a href="avs.xhtml">Steering geometry</a></li>
          </ul>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkg-sa" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Rotation angles for rigid bodies
        </h2>
        <p>
          All points on a rigid body have the same angular rotation
          angles, as we can see on the figure below. Because the
          angular velocity is the derivative of the rotation angles,
          this means that every point on a rigid body has the same
          angular velocity $\vec{\omega}$, and also the same angular
          acceleration $\vec{\alpha}$.
        </p>
        <p>
          In 2D the angle $\theta$ of a rigid body the angle of
          rotation from a fixed reference (typically the $\hat\imath$
          direction), measured positive counter-clockwise. The angular
          velocity is $\omega = \dot\theta$ and the angular
          acceleration is $\alpha = \dot\omega = \ddot\theta$. The
          vector versions of these are $\vec\omega = \omega\,\hat{k}$
          and $\vec\alpha = \alpha\,\hat{k}$, where $\hat{k}$ is the
          out-of-plane direction.
        </p>
        <div class="figureContainer width600" id="rkg-fw">
          <canvas id="rkg-fw-c" width="600" height="600" class="figureImage" >
          </canvas>
          <p class="controls">
            <button class="anim-toggle:rkg-fw-c">animation</button>
            <button class="reset:rkg-fw-c">reset</button>
            Show:
            <button class="option-toggle:rkg-fw-c:showAngles">angles</button>
            <button class="option-toggle:rkg-fw-c:showAngVels">angular velocities</button>
          </p>
          <p class="figureCaption">
            All points on a rigid body rotate at the same rate. Body
            $\mathcal{B}_1$ is rotated by angle $\theta_1$, so its
            angular velocity is $\omega_1 = \dot{\theta}_1$, and
            similarly for the second body.
          </p>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer warning" id="rkg-ww">
          <p class="envHeader">Warning: Labeling angular quantities on rigid bodies</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Angular quantities ($\theta$, $\omega$, $\alpha$) for
              rigid bodies should not be labeled with points. If $P$
              and $Q$ are points on a rigid body, we do not write
              $\omega_P$ or $\omega_Q$ for the angular velocity about
              these points.
            </p>
            <p>
              Instead, we label angular quantities according to the
              body. If we have two rigid bodies $\mathcal{B}_1$ and
              $\mathcal{B}_2$, then $\omega_1$ is the angular velocity
              of the first body (and all points on it) and $\omega_2$
              is the angular velocity of the second body.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol">
        <div id="rkg-i3" class="infoBox factBox">
          <p>
            Rotations in 3D are significantly more complicated than
            rotations in 2D. Unlike positions, velocities, etc, which
            simply go from 2D vectors to 3D vectors, rotational
            quantities go from scalars in 2D to full 3D vectors in
            3D. Angular velocity and angular acceleration are somewhat
            straightforward, so equations <a
            href="#rkg-er">#rkg-er</a> hold in both 2D and 3D, but
            understanding the rotations themselves is significantly
            more complicated. There are three main ways that 3D
            rotations can be represented:
          </p>
          <ol>
            <li><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler_angles">Euler angles</a></li>
            <li><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotation_matrix">Rotation matrices</a></li>
            <li><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternions">Quaternions</a></li>
          </ol>
          <p>
            Detailed study of rotations in 3D is necessary for a full
            understanding of topics ranging from <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attitude_control_(spacecraft)">satellite
            attitude control</a> to <a
            href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Articulated_robot">articulated
            robot construction</a>, and is usually covered in Advanced
            Dynamics courses.
          </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkg-sk" class="contentCol">
        <h2>
          Points on rigid bodies
        </h2>
        <p>
          If we know how one point $P$ on a rigid body is moving and
          we also know how the body is rotating, then we can calculate
          the movement of any other point $Q$ on the same body. The
          formulas for this are given below.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rkg-er">
          <p class="envHeader">Rigid body point relations</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned}
              \vec{r}_Q &amp;= \vec{r}_P + \vec{r}_{PQ} \\
              \vec{v}_Q &amp;= \vec{v}_P
              + \vec{\omega} \times \vec{r}_{PQ} \\
              \vec{a}_Q &amp;= \vec{a}_P
              + \vec{\alpha} \times \vec{r}_{PQ}
              + \vec{\omega} \times (\vec{\omega} \times \vec{r}_{PQ})
              \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Points $P$ and $Q$ are two locations on a rigid
              body. Vectors $\vec{\omega}$ and $\vec{\alpha}$ are the
              angular velocity and angular acceleration of the rigid
              body.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              The first equation is simply the definition of the
              offset vector $\vec{r}_{PQ}$. Differentiating the first
              equation gives

              \[\begin{aligned}
              \vec{r}_Q &amp;= \vec{r}_P + \vec{r}_{PQ} \\
              \dot{\vec{r}}_Q &amp;= \dot{\vec{r}}_P
              + \dot{\vec{r}}_{PQ} \\
              \vec{v}_Q &amp;= \vec{v}_P
              + \vec{\omega} \times \vec{r}_{PQ},
              \end{aligned}\]

              where the derivative of $\vec{r}_{PQ}$ comes from the <a
              href="rkr.xhtml#rkr-ew">rotation formula</a>, given that
              this offset vector is simply rotating with the rigid
              body.
            </p>
            <p>
              If we differentiate again then we obtain

              \[\begin{aligned}
              \vec{v}_Q &amp;= \vec{v}_P
              + \vec{\omega} \times \vec{r}_{PQ} \\
              \dot{\vec{v}}_Q &amp;= \dot{\vec{v}}_P
              + \dot{\vec{\omega}} \times \vec{r}_{PQ}
              + \vec{\omega} \times \dot{\vec{r}}_{PQ} \\
              \vec{a}_Q &amp;= \vec{a}_P
              + \vec{\alpha} \times \vec{r}_{PQ}
              + \vec{\omega} \times (\vec{\omega} \times \vec{r}_{PQ}),
              \end{aligned}\]

              where we use the fact that $\vec{\alpha} =
              \dot{\vec{\omega}}$.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer warning" id="rkg-wc">
          <p class="envHeader">Warning: Cross product order</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Because cross products are <a
              href="rvv.xhtml#rvv-wc">not associative</a>, it is very
              important to compute the centripetal acceleration term
              with the parentheses as shown. That is, we must not
              compute $(\vec{\omega} \times \vec{\omega}) \times
              \vec{r}_{PQ}$, as this is always zero.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          The term $\vec{\omega} \times (\vec{\omega} \times
          \vec{r}_{PQ})$ in the acceleration equation above is called
          the <em>centripetal</em> (center-seeking) term, as it is
          always in the direction $-\vec{r}_{PQ}$ and so acts from $Q$
          towards the “center” $P$.
        </p>
        <div class="figureContainer width600" id="rkg-fr">
          <canvas id="rkg-fr-c" width="600" height="600" class="figureImage" >
          </canvas>
          <p class="controls">
            Show:
            <input type="radio" name="rkg-fr-c-showType" value="none" class="data-input:rkg-fr-c:showType" />
            none
            <input type="radio" name="rkg-fr-c-showType" value="position" class="data-input:rkg-fr-c:showType" />
            position
            <input type="radio" name="rkg-fr-c-showType" value="velocity" class="data-input:rkg-fr-c:showType" />
            velocity
            <input type="radio" name="rkg-fr-c-showType" value="acceleration" class="data-input:rkg-fr-c:showType" />
            acceleration
          </p>
          <p class="figureCaption">
            Two points $P$ and $Q$ on a moving and accelerating rigid body.
          </p>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer exampleProblem" id="rkg-xp">
          <p class="envHeader">Example Problem: Points on a rigid body</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <div class="question">
              <canvas id="rkg-xp-c" width="300" height="200" class="floatRight">
              </canvas>
              <p>
                A rectangular block is sliding along the ground so
                that the contact point $P$ is moving at a constant
                speed of $3\rm\ m/s$ to the left. The block is
                rotating clockwise and just before point $Q$ hits the
                ground the angular velocity is $2\rm\ rad/s$ clockwise
                and the angular acceleration is $3\rm\ rad/s^2$
                clockwise. What is the velocity and acceleration of
                $Q$ just before impact?
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="envContainer solution">
              <div class="envBody">
                <p>
                  Using the regular $\hat\imath,\hat\jmath$ basis, the
                  known information just before impact is

                  \[
                  \vec{r}_{PQ} = 2\,\hat\imath \qquad
                  \vec{v}_P = -3\,\hat\imath \qquad
                  \vec{a}_P = 0 \qquad
                  \vec\omega = -2\,\hat{k} \qquad
                  \vec\alpha = -3\,\hat{k}.
                  \]

                  The velocity and acceleration of $Q$ are given by
                  
                  \[\begin{aligned}
                  \vec{v}_Q &amp;= \vec{v}_P
                  + \vec{\omega} \times \vec{r}_{PQ} \\
                  &amp;= -3\,\hat\imath
                  - 2\,\hat{k} \times 2\,\hat\imath \\
                  &amp;= -3\,\hat\imath
                  - 4\,\hat\jmath \\
                  \vec{a}_Q &amp;= \vec{a}_P
                  + \vec{\alpha} \times \vec{r}_{PQ}
                  + \vec{\omega} \times (\vec{\omega} \times \vec{r}_{PQ}) \\
                  &amp;= 0 - 3\,\hat{k} \times 2\,\hat\imath
                  - 2\,\hat{k} \times (-2\,\hat{k} \times 2\,\hat\imath) \\
                  &amp;= -6\,\hat\jmath - 2\,\hat{k} \times (-4\,\hat\jmath) \\
                  &amp;= -8\,\hat\imath - 6\,\hat\jmath.
                  \end{aligned}\]
                </p>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          The <a href="#rkg-er">#rkg-er</a> equations above are valid
          in both 2D and 3D. If we know that we are in 2D then the
          angular velocity vector is orthogonal to the plane and the
          equations simplify, as shown below.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rkg-e2">
          <p class="envHeader">Rigid body point relations in 2D</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned}
              \vec{r}_Q &amp;= \vec{r}_P + \vec{r}_{PQ} \\
              \vec{v}_Q &amp;= \vec{v}_P
              + \omega \, \vec{r}_{PQ}^\perp \\
              \vec{a}_Q &amp;= \vec{a}_P
              + \alpha \, \vec{r}_{PQ}^\perp
              - \omega^2 \, \vec{r}_{PQ}
              \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Points $P$ and $Q$ are two locations on a rigid
              body. Scalars $\omega$ and $\alpha$ are the angular
              velocity and angular acceleration of the rigid body
              (positive counter-clockwise).
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer warning" id="rkg-wa">
          <p class="envHeader">Warning: Acceleration of rigid bodies</p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              If $\vec{\alpha} = 0$ and $\vec{a}_P = 0$ for a rigid
              body then we would normally say that it is not
              accelerating. This does not mean, however, that the
              points on the bodies are not accelerating. If the body
              is rotating then the centripetal acceleration means that
              in fact most points on the body are accelerating at any
              time.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    </div>
      <div class="footer">
        <p class="copyright">Copyright (C) 2012-2013 Matthew West</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
