<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>
      Rotations and angular velocity
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src=
            "mathjax/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"
            type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkr" class="section level2 contentCol">
        <h1>
          Rotations and Angular Velocity
        </h1>
        <p>
          A <em>rotation</em> of a vector is a change which only
          alters the direction, not the length, of a vector. A
          rotation consists of a <em>rotation axis</em> and a
          <em>rotation rate</em>. By taking the rotation axis as a
          direction and the rotation rate as a length, we can write
          the rotation as a vector, known as the <em>angular
          velocity vector</em> \(\boldsymbol{\omega}\). We use the
          <em>right-hand-rule</em> to describe the direction of
          rotation.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rkr-xr">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Rotating vectors.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Show a cloud of vectors rotating in 3D around an angular
              velocity vector. Maybe have the angular velocity vector
              change in length, showing the rotation slowing down and
              speeding up. Maybe also have it change in direction,
              showing the rotation axis change.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          In 2D the angular velocity can be thought of as a scalar
          (positive for counter-clockwise, negative for clockwise).
          This scalar is just the out-of-plane component of the
          full angular velocity vector. We can draw the angular
          velocity as either a vector pointing out of the plane, or
          as a circle-arrow in the plane, which is simpler for 2D
          diagrams.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rkr-xp">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Comparing angular velocity representations.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Show a set of 2D vectors rotating in the plane, with the
              angular velocity shown as an out-of-plane vector and an
              in-plane circle-arrow.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          If a vector \(\boldsymbol{v}\) is rotating with angular
          velocity vector \(\boldsymbol{\omega}\), the rate of
          change of \(\boldsymbol{v}\) is
        </p>
        <p>
          \[\begin{aligned} \dot{\boldsymbol{v}} &amp;=
          \boldsymbol{\omega} \times \boldsymbol{v}\end{aligned}\]
        </p>
        <p>
          We will see below that this is correct.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkr-sp" class="section level3 contentCol">
        <h2>
          Properties of rotations
        </h2>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>
              Vector derivatives due to rotation are orthogonal to
              the vector:
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned} \dot{\boldsymbol{v}} \cdot
              \boldsymbol{v} = 0 \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Derivation: Using the scalar triple product formula:
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned} \boldsymbol{v} \cdot
              \dot{\boldsymbol{v}} &amp;= \boldsymbol{v} \cdot
              \big( \boldsymbol{\omega} \times \boldsymbol{v} \big)
              &amp;= \boldsymbol{\omega} \cdot \big( \boldsymbol{v}
              \times \boldsymbol{v} \big) &amp;= 0 \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>
              If we have two vectors \(\boldsymbol{u}\) and
              \(\boldsymbol{v}\) both rotating with an angular
              velocity \(\boldsymbol{\omega}\), then
              \(\boldsymbol{u} \cdot \boldsymbol{v}\) is constant:
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned} \frac{d}{dt} \big( \boldsymbol{u}
              \cdot \boldsymbol{v} \big) = 0 \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Derivation: Using the scalar triple product formula:
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned} \frac{d}{dt} \big( \boldsymbol{u}
              \cdot \boldsymbol{v} \big) &amp;=
              \dot{\boldsymbol{u}} \cdot \boldsymbol{v} +
              \boldsymbol{u} \cdot \dot{\boldsymbol{v}} \\ &amp;=
              (\boldsymbol{\omega} \times \boldsymbol{u}) \cdot
              \boldsymbol{v} + \boldsymbol{u} \cdot
              (\boldsymbol{\omega} \times \boldsymbol{v}) \\ &amp;=
              \boldsymbol{v} \cdot (\boldsymbol{\omega} \times
              \boldsymbol{u}) + \boldsymbol{v} \cdot
              (\boldsymbol{u} \times \boldsymbol{\omega}) \\ &amp;=
              \boldsymbol{v} \cdot (\boldsymbol{\omega} \times
              \boldsymbol{u}) - \boldsymbol{v} \cdot
              (\boldsymbol{\omega} \times \boldsymbol{u}) \\ &amp;=
              0 \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>
              Lengths of vectors are preserved by rotation:
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned} v = \sqrt{\boldsymbol{v} \cdot
              \boldsymbol{v}} = \text{constant} \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Derivation: Use derivative of dot product formula.
            </p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>
              Angles between vectors are preserved by rotation:
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned} \theta =
              \cos^{-1}\left(\frac{\boldsymbol{u} \cdot
              \boldsymbol{v}}{u v}\right) = \text{constant}
              \end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Derivation: Use derivative of dot product formula.
            </p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>
              If \(\boldsymbol{v}\) is parallel to
              \(\boldsymbol{\omega}\) then \(\dot{\boldsymbol{v}} =
              0\).
            </p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          This shows that the rotation formula
          \(\dot{\boldsymbol{v}} = \boldsymbol{\omega} \times
          \boldsymbol{v}\) does indeed perform a rigid rotation
          about \(\boldsymbol{\omega}\).
        </p>
        <p>
          The units of \(\boldsymbol{\omega}\) are \(\rm rad/s\).
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rkr-xf">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Angular velocity and angular frequency.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Show the relationship between \(\rm rad/s\), \(\rm Hz\),
              and period \(T\). See <a href=
              "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_frequency"><code class="url">
              https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_frequency</code></a>
              for some nice examples.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkr-sd" class="section level3 contentCol">
        <h2>
          Decompositions of rotation rates
        </h2>
        <p>
          \[\begin{aligned} \boldsymbol{\omega} =
          \frac{\dot{\boldsymbol{v}} \times \boldsymbol{v}}{v^2} =
          \frac{\dot{\boldsymbol{v}} \times
          \boldsymbol{v}}{\boldsymbol{v} \cdot
          \boldsymbol{v}}\end{aligned}\]
        </p>
        <p>
          \[\begin{aligned} \frac{d}{dt} \,\hat{v} &amp;=
          \boldsymbol{\omega} \times \,\hat{v} \\ \frac{d}{dt}
          \boldsymbol{v} &amp;= \boldsymbol{\omega} \times
          \boldsymbol{v} \\ \frac{d}{dt} \boldsymbol{v} &amp;=
          \dot{v} \,\hat{v} + \boldsymbol{\omega} \times
          \boldsymbol{v}\end{aligned}\]
        </p>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkr-sr" class="section level3 contentCol">
        <h2>
          Rodrigues’ rotation formula
        </h2>
        <p>
          Rodrigues’ rotation formula: \(\boldsymbol{v}\) is
          rotated by angle \(\theta\) about \(\hat{u}\) to give:
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer equation" id="rkr-er">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Rodrigues’ rotation formula
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              \[\operatorname{Rot}_{\theta}(\boldsymbol{v}) =
              \boldsymbol{v} \cos\theta + (\hat{u} \times
              \boldsymbol{v}) \sin\theta + \hat{u} (\hat{u} \cdot
              \boldsymbol{v}) (1 - \cos\theta)\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer derivation">
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Assume \(\boldsymbol{v}\) is not parallel to
              \(\hat{u}\). Then let \(\boldsymbol{b} = \hat{u} \times
              \boldsymbol{v}\) and \(\boldsymbol{a} = \boldsymbol{b}
              \times \boldsymbol{u}\), so \(\hat{a}, \hat{b}, \hat{u}\)
              is a right-handed orthonormal basis (see PV.CC). Take
              \(\phi\) to be the angle between \(\boldsymbol{v}\) and
              \(\hat{u}\). Then we do a rotation by \(\theta\) in
              the \(\hat{a}\)-\(\hat{b}\) plane:
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned} \boldsymbol{v} &amp;= v \sin\phi
              \,\hat{a} + v \cos\phi \,\hat{u} \\
              \operatorname{Rot}_{\theta}(\boldsymbol{v}) &amp;= v
              \cos\theta \sin\phi \,\hat{a} + v \sin\theta \sin\phi
              \,\hat{b} + v \cos\phi \,\hat{u}\end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Now we want to convert from the
              \(\hat{a},\hat{b},\hat{u}\) basis to write the rotated
              result in terms of \(\boldsymbol{v}, (\hat{u} \times
              \boldsymbol{v}), \hat{u}\). To do this, we need to work
              out what \(\hat{a},\hat{b},\hat{u}\) are in terms of
              these other vectors.
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned} \hat{b} &amp;= \frac{\hat{u} \times
              \boldsymbol{v}}{\|\hat{u} \times \boldsymbol{v}\|} =
              \frac{\hat{u} \times \boldsymbol{v}}{v \sin\phi} \\
              \hat{a} &amp;= \frac{\boldsymbol{b} \times
              \hat{u}}{\|\boldsymbol{b} \times \boldsymbol{u}\|} =
              \frac{\boldsymbol{b} \times \hat{u}}{v \sin\phi} =
              \frac{(\hat{u} \times \boldsymbol{v}) \times \hat{u}}{v
              \sin\phi} = \frac{\hat{u} \times (\boldsymbol{v} \times
              \hat{u})}{v \sin\phi} = \frac{\boldsymbol{v} - (\hat{u}
              \cdot \boldsymbol{v}) \hat{u}}{v \sin\phi} = \frac{1}{v
              \sin\phi} \boldsymbol{v} - \frac{\hat{u} \cdot
              \boldsymbol{v}}{v \sin\phi} \hat{u}\end{aligned}\]
            </p>
            <p>
              Substituting these into the rotated vector expression
              above gives
            </p>
            <p>
              \[\begin{aligned}
              \operatorname{Rot}_{\theta}(\boldsymbol{v}) &amp;= v
              \cos\theta \sin\phi \left( \frac{1}{v \sin\phi}
              \boldsymbol{v} - \frac{\hat{u} \cdot \boldsymbol{v}}{v
              \sin\phi} \hat{u} \right) + v \sin\theta \sin\phi \left(
              \frac{\hat{u} \times \boldsymbol{v}}{v \sin\phi} \right)
              + v \cos\phi \,\hat{u} \\ &amp;= \cos\theta
              \boldsymbol{v} - \cos\theta (\hat{u} \cdot
              \boldsymbol{v}) \,\hat{u} + \sin\theta (\hat{u} \times
              \boldsymbol{v}) + v\cos\theta \,\hat{u} \\ &amp;=
              \cos\theta \boldsymbol{v} + (1 - \cos\theta) (\hat{u}
              \cdot \boldsymbol{v}) \hat{u} + \sin\theta (\hat{u}
              \times \boldsymbol{v})\end{aligned}\]
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rkr-xn">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Rotations are not vectors.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Rotations are not vectors. We could write a rotation
              about the direction \(\hat{u}\) by angle \(\theta\) as
              the vector \(\boldsymbol{v} = \theta \hat{u}\). But this
              would be dangerous, as adding rotation vectors would not
              correspond to composing the rotations (as rotations do
              not commute). See p. 89 in GCP.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
