<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>
      Position, velocity, and acceleration
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src=
            "mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default"
            type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
            <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript">
            </script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="container">
      <div class="header"><h1>TAM 212: Introductory Dynamics</h1></div>
      <div class="navbar">
        <ul>
          <li><a href="index.xhtml" id="navHome">Home</a></li>
          <li><a href="info.xhtml" id="navInfo">Info</a>
          </li><li><a href="people.xhtml" id="navPeople">People</a>
          </li><li><a href="sched.xhtml" id="navSched">Schedule</a></li>
          <li><a href="ref.xhtml" id="navRef">Reference</a>
          </li><li><a href="apps.xhtml" id="navApps">Applications</a></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="browserWarning">
        <strong>Warning:</strong>
        This website has only been tested on Chrome version 24 and higher. Your browser may not be fully supported.
      </div>
      <div class="mainBlock">
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkv" class="section level2 contentCol">
        <h1>
          Position, velocity, and acceleration
        </h1>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkv-sp" class="section level3 contentCol">
        <h2>
          Position vectors
        </h2>
        <p>
          Two points \(A\) and \(B\) can be used to define a vector
          \(\boldsymbol{r}_{AB} = \overrightarrow{AB}\) from \(A\)
          to \(B\). We call this the <em>relative position</em> of
          \(B\) from \(A\). If we start from the origin \(O\), so
          we have \(\boldsymbol{r}_{OA} = \overrightarrow{OA}\),
          then we call this the <em>position vector</em> of
          position \(A\). When it is clear, we will write
          \(\boldsymbol{r}_P\) for this position vector, or
          sometimes even just \(\boldsymbol{r}\).
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Important point:</strong> The position vector
          \(\boldsymbol{r}_{OP}\) of a point \(P\) depends on which
          origin we are using. Using a different origin will result in
          a different position vector for the same point.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rkv-xp">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Position vectors depend on the origin.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Show two different origins with the same
              \(\hat\imath,\hat\jmath\) basis at both, and a point
              \(P\), and show the position vector relative to each
              origin.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          <strong>Important point:</strong> We can write any position vector in any basis.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rkv-xb">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Position vectors can be written in any basis.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Show two origins, one with \(\hat\imath,\hat\jmath\)
              basis and one with \(\hat{a},\hat{b}\) basis. Show a
              point \(P\) and the two position vectors. Show that
              either position vector can be written in terms of either
              basis.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rkv-st" class="section level3 contentCol">
        <h2>
          Transformation of position vectors
        </h2>
        <p>
          The position vectors of a point from two different
          origins differ by the offset vector between the origins.
          That is:
        </p>
        <p>
          \[\begin{aligned} \overrightarrow{OP} &amp;=
          \overrightarrow{OO'} + \overrightarrow{O'P} \\
          \boldsymbol{r}_{OP} &amp;= \boldsymbol{r}_{OO'} +
          \boldsymbol{r}_{O'P}\end{aligned}\]
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rkv-xo">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Converting position vectors for different origins.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Show two origins and the two position vectors to a point
              \(P\). Show that the relative offset relation holds.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          <strong>Philosophical point:</strong> Coordinates are for
          positions, bases are for vectors?  Coordinates can be
          nonlinear, bases are always linear?  Position vectors relate
          these two things? We use the term coordinates for positions
          and components for vectors.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rkv-xp">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Pantograph.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Consider a four-bar pantogram, as in <a href=
              "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pantograph"><code class=
              "url">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pantograph</code></a>.
              Take \(O\) to be the fixed point, \(T\) to be the tracing
              point, and \(D\) to be the drawing point. Show that
              \(\overrightarrow{OD} = \alpha \overrightarrow{OT}\) for
              some scalar \(\alpha\). Why does this mean that the
              pantograph works? What determines \(\alpha\).
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    </div>
      <div class="footer">
        <p class="copyright">Copyright (C) 2012-2013 Matthew West</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
