<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>
      Positions and coordinates
    </title>
    <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="icomoon.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <script src="mathjax/MathJax.js?config=default" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="jquery-1.7.2.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="pageControl.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sylvester.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="sha1.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script src="PrairieDraw.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rvp" class="section level2 contentCol">
        <h1>
          Positions and coordinates
        </h1>
        <p>
          A <em>position</em> in 2D or 3D space is a single
          location, which may or may not be occupied by a physical
          object. Positions exist before we measure or describe
          them in any way, but to do calculations we need to
          introduce coordinates for positions.
        </p>
        <p>
          A <em>coordinate chart</em> is a map that takes a
          position in space and tells us what its
          <em>coordinates</em> are. Coordinates serve to label
          positions. For example, the coordinates “5th
          Ave. and 42nd St.” label the intersection next to
          the New York Public Library in the street map coordinate
          chart. The coordinates of a position are a list of
          scalars that act as a label for the position, such as
          \(x = 5, y = 42\) for this position in New York.
        </p>
        <p>
          It is common to have several different coordinate charts
          in use for the same positions in space. For example,
          “\(40^\circ 45' 12.46''\)N, \(73^\circ 58' 51.16''\)W”
          are also coordinates for this same intersection, but this
          time in the latitude/longitude coordinate chart, which we
          could write as the pair of scalars \(\lambda =
          -73.980878, \phi = 40.753461\). Here we converted
          degrees/minutes/seconds to decimal notation, wrote the
          coordinates in the East-West/North-South order to be
          horizontal/vertical, and realized that directions West
          are negative.
        </p>
        <p>
          We can also think of a coordinate chart as mapping a list
          of coordinates to a particular point, which is how we
          often illustrate a coordinate chart graphically. For
          example, if we know a latitude and longitude then we can
          locate the corresponding point on the Earth. The
          <em>origin</em> of a coordinate chart is the point with
          all zero coordinates. Different coordinate charts may
          share an origin, or they may have different origins.
        </p>
        <p>
          If we have a point that moves around in space, then its
          coordinates will change with time. It is also possible
          for the coordinate chart itself to be moving in time, so
          that even if a point remains stationary in space, its
          coordinates might be changing.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rvp-xp">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Polar and Cartesian coordinates.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Show polar and Cartesian coordinate lines, with
              different origins, moving particle, show coords in
              both systems as functions of time. Ask: can the point
              move somewhere so that both \(r = 0, \theta = 0\)
              and \(x = 0, y = 0\) simultaneously?
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rvp-xm">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Moving coordinate charts.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Same as previous example, but moving coordinate
              charts with a stationary point.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>
          When we describe a coordinate chart mathematically, we do
          so by relating it to another coordinate chart (typically
          Cartesian).
        </p>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rvp-sc" class="section level3 contentCol">
        <h3>
          Cartesian Coordinates
        </h3>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rvp-sp" class="section level3 contentCol">
        <h3>
          Polar Coordinates
        </h3>
        <p>
          \[\begin{aligned} x &amp;= r \cos\theta &amp; r &amp;=
          \sqrt{x^2 + y^2} \\ y &amp;= r \sin\theta &amp; \theta
          &amp;= \operatorname{atan2}(y, x)\end{aligned}\]
        </p>
      </div>
      <div class="infoCol"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="contentBlock">
      <div id="rvp-sv" class="section level3 contentCol">
        <h3>
          Visualizing coordinate charts.
        </h3>
        <p>
          To visualize a coordinate chart we will often draw the
          lines on which just one of the coordinates is changing.
        </p>
        <div class="envContainer example" id="rvp-xv">
          <p class="envHeader">
            Example: Visualizing a coordinate chart.
          </p>
          <div class="envBody">
            <p>
              Have an active canvas on which we can draw with the
              mouse by clicking (just enable drawing points? or
              also lines?). Have a readout showing the coordinates
              of the mouse at all times. Use polar coordinates,
              which an origin that is not centered on the canvas
              (or maybe some more complex coordinate system?).
              Start with a blank canvas. Ask: draw points that have
              first coordinate equal to 2. Then draw the points
              with first coordinate equal to 1. Do the same for
              points with second coordinate equal to 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
              6. What type of coordinate system is this? Show the
              standard polar grid.
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
